<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Fatal Conveniences</title>
  <link href="../Styles/FatalConveniences.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1096cf69-c1c2-4b94-ac1d-5d952fe64055" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="backmatter">
<p class="FMBMH"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-ACK"><span class="blue"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page269" title="269"/>Acknowledgments</span></a></p>
<p class="TXFF"><span class="boldsc">THIS BOOK WAS MORE CHALLENGING TO</span> write than I imagined it would be. Nothing is clearer to me now: it takes a village to write a book. This one, at least.</p>
<p class="TXT">What you see in these pages was maybe one-tenth of the research we had to find, go through, vet, and understand before we could put it all together.</p>
<p class="TXT">I am extremely grateful to the village that got this book done.</p>
<p class="TXT">I want to thank a force of nature named Karen Rinaldi and the entire team at Harper Wave for believing that I could push the envelope on this book.</p>
<p class="TXT">I owe huge thanks and massive gratitude to my main partner/writer/editor, Bill Tonelli. We did my previous book, <span class="ital">SuperLife</span>, together, and this one was ten times as challenging. Bill showed grit, persistence, and professionalism. Without him this book would simply not be here. Bill, you rock. Thank you.</p>
<p class="TXT">To my great book agent, Richard Pine, for being there, grounded and wise, and Eliza Rothstein and the whole team at InkWell Management.</p>
<p class="TXT">To my whole team, which had to navigate me through more than a year of working on this book: my assistants Kirsten Asher and Indira Dejtia, and Melissa Maulin Fuir, Kaili Bonnyman, Corrine Cassels, Ronald Fernandes, and Thiago Veiga.</p>
<p class="TXT">A huge thanks to Dr. Leonardo Trasande for becoming a new friend as well as educating me on endocrine disruptors in his great, thorough <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page270" title="270"/>book <span class="ital">Sicker, Fatter, Poorer: The Urgent Threat of Hormone-Disrupting Chemicals to Our Health and Future . . . and What We Can Do About It</span>. I’m also grateful to Dr. Shanna H. Swan for her wise words about the dangers of endocrine disruptors and other chemicals we unknowingly take in. She’s one of the world’s leading environmental and reproductive epidemiologists and the author of <span class="ital">Count Down: How Our Modern World Is Threatening Sperm Counts, Altering Male and Female Reproductive Development, and Imperiling the Future of the Human Race</span>.</p>
<p class="TXT">Massive gratitude goes to my good friend Paul Hawken and his lifelong work with all his books as well as Regeneration (and his team) as he paves the road for people like me to try to build upon.</p>
<p class="TXT">Special thanks to Raven Devanney for kicking ass and finding the researchers, organizing them, coordinating with them, and surviving the crazy path through the journey of this book.</p>
<p class="TXT">And to all the researchers, the undergrads, master’s and PhD student interns, the professionals, and the amateurs whom we were able to teach to be great, you all helped with the everything that went into this book. Thanks for hanging in there as we figured it out. Some of you lasted longer than others, but to all of you I am grateful.</p>
<p class="TXT">And to the badasses who were with us the whole way!</p>

<ul class="ultxt">
<li>Krissy Walter Lieser</li>
<li>Nathan Olien</li>
<li>Morgan Webb</li>
<li>Sydney Webb</li>
<li>Luz Verónica</li>
<li>Rebecca Harris</li>
<li>Heidi Hahn</li>
<li>Rachel Misch</li>
<li>Sally Richardson</li>
<li>Tammy See</li>
<li>Isabella Marzano</li>
</ul>

<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page271" title="271"/>To the rest of you, thanks for all your hard work.</p>

<ul class="ultxt">
<li>Jacob Kummerling</li>
<li>Suzan Chong</li>
<li>Renee Santangelo</li>
<li>Ryan Bradly</li>
<li>Alan Carr</li>
<li>Ashley Forest</li>
<li>Martha Elizabeth Baker</li>
<li>David Conner</li>
<li>Rebecca De Cosmis</li>
<li>Christina Laughlin</li>
<li>Cassidy Chalhoub</li>
<li>John Massart</li>
<li>Colin T</li>
</ul>


<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page272" title="272"/>And finally, to the other professional editors and researchers who helped me with their expertise and ability to keep me from going completely, overwhelmingly mad: thank you, Sara Vigneri, John Jusino, and Ambrose Martos.</p>
</body>
</html>