<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Fatal Conveniences</title>
  <link href="../Styles/FatalConveniences.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1096cf69-c1c2-4b94-ac1d-5d952fe64055" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<p class="CN"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH005"><span class="blue"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page79" title="79"/>5</span></a></p>
<p class="CT"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH005"><span class="blue">Food and Beverages</span></a></p>
<p class="TXFF"><span class="boldsc">ONCE UPON A TIME, WHEN WE</span> wanted to eat, we first had to expend energy, whether by foraging for wild fruits, nuts, roots, and so on or by hunting animals, killing them, and butchering them. In other words, we had to do a lot of work. That fact of life maintained the balance between the calories we consumed and the calories we burned and was one of the reasons there were no obese cavemen or -women or any who suffered from type 2 diabetes, heart disease, or the other food-related ailments. The food was also all natural, unprocessed, organic, and wild, as nature intended.</p>
<p class="TXT">But it was not at all convenient.</p>
<p class="TXT">Today, thanks to the invention of agriculture twelve thousand or so years ago, plus the technological advances that have come ever since, you can sit on your sofa and acquire food by burning only the energy required to move your fingers around your phone.</p>
<p class="TXT">What kind of food is a completely different matter. Agriculture is what makes it possible for the planet to sustain billions of people and enables us all to eat and drink as effortlessly as we do. But the conveniences of easily accessible food have gone overboard. As a result our current food environment, including the healthiest things we can eat, has been transformed, and not always for the better.</p>
<p class="TXT">When I checked while writing this book, this was the ranking of top sources of calories in the American diet:</p>

<ol class="numbered">
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page80" title="80"/>Grain-based desserts, meaning not only cookies, cakes, doughnuts, and pies but also granola bars, which are essentially desserts in disguise</li>
<li>Bread</li>
<li>Chicken</li>
<li>Soda, energy drinks, and sports drinks</li>
<li>Pizza</li>
<li>Alcohol</li>
<li>Pasta</li>
</ol>
<p class="TXT">Notice a pattern there? Nearly everything is made with refined grains, meaning foods that don’t require refrigeration and don’t spoil. Thanks to modern technology, they don’t even get stale the way they once did. A loaf of bread that’s as fresh after a month in your kitchen as it was the day you bought it should make you worry.</p>
<p class="TXT">Invariably, along with those refined grains comes sugar in one form or another; industrialized fats and oils, too. Basically, you’re looking at the Standard American Diet, also known as SAD for good reason. Pretty much all that stuff is as convenient as can be, meaning it provides energy consumed with virtually no energy expended, not even the effort required to chop vegetables or turn on a stove.</p>
<p class="TXT">As we see throughout this book, convenience always comes with a price. Here, it’s obesity, diabetes, coronary artery disease, high blood pressure, several types of cancer, liver disease, years of infirmity, and premature death. Astronomical health care costs, too—don’t forget that one.</p>
<p class="TXT">Pass the corn chips, baby!</p>
<p class="TXT">It’s easy to blame individuals for their poor nutritional choices, but we all inhabit the same food environment, over which we have little or no control. And although it’s possible to follow a healthy diet, it requires time, knowledge, and effort, all of which are in short supply these days. We (and our kids) are inundated with messages about how great that ultracheesy stuffed crust meat lover’s pizza tastes or how great it will be <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page81" title="81"/>to sink our teeth into a flame-broiled double bacon cheddar burger and then wash it down with a quart of carbonated liquid candy.</p>
<p class="TXT">But ask somebody what to do with a head of broccoli, a couple cloves of garlic, and a little olive oil, or cranberry beans, tomatoes, and a handful of herbs and spices, and they come up empty. There are kids today who don’t recognize some vegetables in the raw because they’ve never seen them or watched anybody cook them.</p>
<p class="TXT">As always, the hidden culprit is the profit motive. Modern companies have to grow if they want their stock prices to rise, and how can a food manufacturer stimulate continuous growth? Either by getting us to spend more money on the food we eat (a hard sell) or by getting us to buy more today than we did yesterday and more tomorrow than we did today. That’s the mentality that treats food as just another commercial product to be sold to suckers rather than the gift of nature that sustains us and keeps us healthy and thriving.</p>
<p class="TXT">Which is what food truly is—or should be.</p>
<p class="TXT">The author Jared Diamond called the switch from hunting and gathering to agriculture “the worst mistake in the history of the human race.” Once we shifted away from a diet of natural, whole, unrefined foods—meat, fish, milk, eggs, fruit, vegetables, nuts—to one based on grains, we as a species became shorter and weaker and more vulnerable to inflammation and disease.</p>
<p class="TXT">I’d call that a fatal convenience, wouldn’t you?</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Fruits and Vegetables</p>
<p class="TXF">We’re not at the point—not yet at least—where we need to fear produce for the hidden hazards and dangerous additives that exist in just about everything else we consume. Apples still contain just one ingredient: apple. The same is true of all the rest of the foods that grow in dirt or hang from trees and bushes. So we feel safe when we eat what we now like to call a “whole-food, plant-based” diet. But that doesn’t mean things are as simple and safe as they once were.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page82" title="82"/>Our relationship with fruit and vegetables used to be much more intimate. In 1862, around 90 percent of Americans made their living from the land. That year, President Lincoln signed legislation creating the US Department of Agriculture (USDA), but he also approved the Homestead Act, which eventually put a huge amount of farmland into the hands of agriculture corporations posing as homesteaders.</p>
<p class="TXT">That was when farming suddenly became a tough business for small operators, and by 1940, only 30 percent of Americans were farmers. Today, the number is 2 percent, despite the fact that the population has boomed and we eat more than ever.</p>
<p class="TXT">Just as eating has changed—a <span class="ital">lot</span>—since then, farming has, too, thanks to its own conveniences, mostly technological. In the eighteenth century, it took nearly five acres of land to feed one person for a year. Now that feat is accomplished with just half an acre. You could see this as a good thing: if we are growing more crops with fewer farmers, less land, and less labor, we must be more productive than before. But this efficiency has come at a cost, to both our health and that of the planet.</p>
<p class="TXT">For instance, to make a farm really efficient, it helps to stick with just a few robust crops—preferably one, in fact. But that takes a toll on the soil. When researchers analyzed data for forty-three crops from 1950 to 1999, they showed declines in six key nutrients—protein, calcium, phosphorus, iron, vitamin C, and vitamin B<sub>2</sub>—suggesting a trade-off between yield and nutrient content.</p>
<p class="TXT">Why are the plants we eat suddenly less good for us? It seems that hearty crops—the kind that produce higher yields—are not so efficient at absorbing nutrients from the soil. This has led to a weird problem that emerged only since industrial farming began: malnourished obese people.</p>
<p class="TXT">It’s no easy task to fill acre upon acre with crops that can resist disease and drought and produce high yields. One way is to use chemical help. After World War II, nitrogen-based fertilizers became an inexpensive solution to increase crop production, and their use has increased dramatically since then. When farmers use nitrogen, it breaks down into nitrate and is absorbed into the groundwater, which can end up in drinking <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page83" title="83"/>water. Research showed that in agricultural areas, the water in 22 percent of private wells exceeds the safe level of nitrate. Ingesting high levels of nitrate in water increases the rates of thyroid abnormalities in children, studies have shown. In 2006, researchers concluded that nitrate ingested as a result of agricultural runoff is probably carcinogenic.</p>
<p class="TXT">And just because a fertilizer is all natural doesn’t mean it’s harmless. Manure isn’t carcinogenic, but it <span class="ital">is</span> a natural home to <span class="ital">E. coli</span> bacteria, which can cause serious illness and even death. Every year there are recalls of packaged vegetables, usually ones we eat raw, such as lettuce, that have been contaminated with <span class="ital">E. coli</span>. Though this can happen even on small farms, the problem becomes a lot bigger when produce comes from a gigantic factory farm. <span class="ital">E. coli</span> from manure has also been found in water used to irrigate crops. In 2018, <span class="ital">E. coli</span> contamination of romaine lettuce was traced back to an industrial cattle farm. It killed five people and landed ninety-six in the hospital, twenty-seven of whom had kidney failure. Experts say that the cattle waste somehow ended up in the irrigation water.</p>
<p class="TXT">Then we get to the eight-hundred-pound gorilla in the produce bin: the weed killer, or herbicide, glyphosate, better known by its brand name, Roundup, and the genetically modified organisms that the toxic chemical has brought into existence. Here’s where things get really gnarly. Glyphosate has become the most commonly used weed killer in the world since its introduction in 1974. But it works only because certain crops, such as soy, have been genetically modified so that they can resist the chemical’s killing power, thereby allowing farmers to spray it at will. But as the weeds have also become resistant, farmers have had to use even more.</p>
<p class="TXT">Why does this matter? Because glyphosate has been linked to endocrine-disrupting activity, hypertension, diabetes, stroke, autism, kidney failure, Parkinson’s disease, and Alzheimer’s disease. In 2015, the International Agency for Research on Cancer declared it a probable human carcinogen.</p>
<p class="TXT">It gets worse: the FDA disagreed with that finding and maintains <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page84" title="84"/>that glyphosate poses no risk to our health. Here we go again, with the FDA seemingly not looking out for us. Meanwhile, in 2018, a lawsuit against Monsanto, the maker of Roundup, resulted in the public release of documents showing that the company had interfered in the peer review process of academic papers, ghostwritten articles in toxicology journals, and created fake academic websites defending its products.</p>
<p class="TXT">There’s a chance that the tide may be turning. In June 2022, a US Court of Appeals overturned the EPA’s decision that glyphosate is safe, forcing the agency to reassess its evaluation. Personally, I don’t need to wait for the EPA, the FDA, the USDA, or any other government agency to tell me that I’m better off without glyphosate—or any pesticide, really—in my life.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Pesticides and herbicides help farmers grow more robust crops, but these chemicals have also been linked to the death of an important part of our food cycle: bees. They pollinate our crops, so the drastic decline in bee populations over the last few years is extremely concerning. Researchers point to a widely used group of pesticides called neonicotinoids as a possible culprit. Bees are exposed to them in pollen, nectar, dust, and dew on leaves. Neonicotinoids interfere with their nervous system and can lead to paralysis and death. A single treated corn seed contains enough pesticide to kill more than eighty thousand bees. If we blatantly go against nature, there will be consequences. I will continue to hammer at this point: what hurts you will hurt nature, and vice versa.</p>
<p class="TXT">The use of Roundup to kill weeds isn’t just bad for bees; it has also been linked to the sad fate of the monarch butterfly, whose main food source, the milkweed, has been decimated by the herbicide. Without this important source of nourishment, migrating monarchs have been dying off; their population in North America has dropped by as much as 90 percent in the last two decades.</p>
<p class="TXT">Fertilizer used on industrial farms is also a major contributor to <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page85" title="85"/>greenhouse gas emissions. Nitrous oxide (N<sub>2</sub>O) emissions from farm fertilizers accounted for 74 percent of total N<sub>2</sub>O emissions in 2020, and the impact of a pound of N<sub>2</sub>O on warming the atmosphere is almost three hundred times that of a pound of carbon dioxide.</p>
<p class="TXT">Even without those harmful chemicals, modern farming has managed to damage the soil. It’s easy to take the health of land for granted—but we forget that it’s a living organism, not simply dirt, which is a misnomer in any case.</p>
<p class="TXT">When early Americans began farming, the soil of the Midwest was thriving. Prairie grass that died and decomposed fed an ecosystem of microorganisms flourishing beneath the top layer of black earth—perfect for growing crops. But after decades of monoculture farming, most of the fertile topsoil in the upper Midwest is gone—depleted. And this has the potential to cause a whole cascade of other problems, as we saw during the Dust Bowl of the 1930s. Scientists estimate that if our current rate of soil loss continues, all of the world’s topsoil could be gone in sixty years. That will make eating a healthy, all-natural plant-based diet a thing of the past.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">First things first: we need to continue eating fresh, natural, unprocessed fruit, vegetables, nuts, seeds, mushrooms, and beans. A lot. But we also need to be conscious consumers. Today, we as individuals have many ways to avoid supporting Big Agriculture’s bad habits and to improve our health and the environment’s, too.</p>
<p class="TXT">The farmers’ market movement has spread to almost every big city, suburb, and small town in the United States. When you shop at one, you support local, small-scale growing, which is usually done using responsible, sustainable methods. You put your money into the pockets of people who live near you. You also cut down on a lot of shipping mileage, because now your berries are coming from thirty or forty minutes away instead of from another continent. You end up buying a lot less plastic, too, since <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page86" title="86"/>your fruits and vegetables are probably sold naked, without packaging or containers. You’re doing the planet a big favor.</p>
<p class="TXT">But if you <span class="ital">really</span> want to go local, start an organic garden in your backyard. If you have enough space to get serious about it, that’s great. Organizations such as Food Not Lawns (foodnotlawns.com), Green America (greenamerica.org), and Food Forest Abundance (foodforestabundance.com) can help you transform your pretty but pointless lawn into something that produces food for you and your neighborhood insects and other animals. When you realize that US lawns consume roughly 3 trillion gallons of water and 70 million pounds of pesticides a year, you see how much of a difference we can make if we try.</p>
<p class="TXT">What if we started growing food in some of that? We could solve so many food insecurity issues. Wouldn’t it be empowering for you and your family to just walk outside and eat from your yard?</p>
<p class="TXT">You can feed your family for several months at minimum, more if you get into canning and jarring. If all you can manage is some herbs in a pot or window box or some lettuces in a hydroponic garden, that’s great, too, because fresh herbs and greens pack a powerful nutritional punch. You’ll have no questions about where your food was grown, how the soil was treated, or whether harmful chemical fertilizers and pesticides were used; your produce won’t produce a carbon footprint due to its being shipped or refrigerated in trucks as it travels to you; there won’t be containers of any kind, even so-called recyclable ones, to discard; there won’t be drives to the supermarket, which take their toll on the air you breathe. And you will be eating food just minutes after it was picked. There’s nothing fresher, better tasting, or better for you.</p>
<p class="TXT">Here’s another way I love to make accessible, healthy food: buy organic seeds, such as broccoli, kale, alfalfa, lentils, and so on, and grow sprouts, which are an insanely powerful source of the nutrients those vegetables contain—even more than the mature vegetables. They’re cheaper, too. All you need to do is soak the seeds for about eight hours in a jar covered with a square of cheesecloth held in place by a rubber band. Pour out the water, rinse the seeds, refill the jar with water, and stand it upside <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page87" title="87"/>down at an angle so all the water drains out. Repeat twice a day until the seeds have sprouted. They’re amazing in salad. And you just grew yourself a superfood.</p>
<p class="TXT">Legumes are an important source of plant protein, which is extremely important if you’ve made the healthy decision to at least decrease the amount of meat and poultry you consume. Buy dried lentils and beans in bulk, then soak and cook them as needed; it’s much better than buying them canned, with all kinds of additives, preservatives, and unnecessary chemicals and more containers to throw away.</p>
<p class="TXT">Remember always to wash produce, even things you peel before eating, such avocados, cucumbers, and melons. This way you’ll be sure to remove as much pesticide residue as possible.</p>
<p class="TXT">Start paying attention to where your produce was grown. This is part of a larger problem—our insistence on eating fruits and vegetables whether they’re in season where we live or not. Once upon a time, you could find certain items only at particular times of year—when they were in season. Today, you can find pretty much anything at any time. But this is possible only because of modern transport, which requires harvesting produce before it’s fully matured, so it can reach far-flung shoppers before it’s overripe.</p>
<p class="TXT">The problem with that is twofold: early harvesting means that the nutrients haven’t had time to fully develop, so you’re being cheated out of antioxidants and so on. And the carbon footprint of produce that travels thousands of miles is killing us. Here’s some good advice: eat food only when it’s in season where you live! If you have to do without blueberries in February, deal with it. Find something else that you like.</p>
<p class="TXT">Even better, buy frozen fruits and vegetables. Chances are they were picked at their peak maturity, meaning they’re probably even healthier than fresh. Cheaper, too. Don’t be a produce snob!</p>
<p class="TXT">We’d all be a lot safer and healthier if we could eat organic produce only, but there’s a problem: it’s expensive. Most families couldn’t afford all the fruits and vegetables they need if they shopped only organic. But the Environmental Working Group provides a partial solution. It’s called the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page88" title="88"/>Dirty Dozen, a list of the produce types that contain the most pesticide residue. If you buy those fruits and vegetables organic and buy conventional produce otherwise, you’ll be sparing yourself and your family a lot of possible harm.</p>
<p class="TXT">The current Dirty Dozen, according to the EWG:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Strawberries</li>
<li>Spinach</li>
<li>Kale</li>
<li>Nectarines</li>
<li>Apples</li>
<li>Grapes</li>
<li>Bell and hot peppers</li>
<li>Cherries</li>
<li>Peaches</li>
<li>Pears</li>
<li>Celery</li>
<li>Tomatoes</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">On the EWG website (ewg.org), you can find an extended list of what’s safe to eat and what’s not.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Dairy Products</p>
<p class="TXF">I’m a mammal. You are, too, and the main thing we mammals have in common is this: we need milk.</p>
<p class="TXT">We need it immediately after we’re born, for sure, and a little while thereafter. Milk is one of nature’s coolest miracles—it contains just the right amount of the proper nutrients (protein, fat, carbohydrates, calcium, vitamins) to sustain a newborn with no other food necessary, and it arrives along with baby free of charge.</p>
<p class="TXT">But then comes the time when we outgrow our need for milk, roughly when we’re able to start eating whole foods. We even stop making lactase, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page89" title="89"/>the enzyme that enables us to digest dairy properly. This is nature’s way, and if you need proof, ask yourself if you’ve ever seen any other adult mammal drinking milk.</p>
<p class="TXT">So how is it that we humans have retained our taste for it? Our agrarian ancestors had good reason to keep drinking milk into adulthood: it is highly nutritious, and historically, if you owned a cow in her reproductive years, it was like having a food factory that required only grass for fuel. But in order to digest dairy products more easily, we began processing milk, turning it into foods such as cheese, butter, yogurt, kefir, lassi, labneh, the list goes on and on—culturing milk to make it edible for all but the most lactose intolerant.</p>
<p class="TXT">Here in the United States there’s another reason we continue to consume milk: we have a whole lot of dairy farmers, which is why the federal government promotes it. If you look at the USDA’s MyPlate guide to nutrition, dairy products get their own spot; the official, slightly insane recommendation is that adults consume three cups every day. The USDA oversees something called the National Fluid Milk Processor Promotion Program, which pushes milk as a generic product—you may remember its “Got milk?” ads. Its goal is to foster “a new generation of milk drinkers.”</p>
<p class="TXT">But do we really need more milk drinkers? Is all that dairy—or any dairy at all—good for us?</p>
<p class="TXT">We’re not content to produce milk as nature intended. In 1993, the FDA approved Posilac, Monsanto’s synthetic growth hormone, for use in dairy cattle. It contains bovine somatotropin, or bST, which increases cows’ milk production, and is given to them a couple months after they’ve given birth. The FDA says it’s safe for both the cows and the humans consuming their milk.</p>
<p class="TXT">But if that’s true, why did both the European Union and Canada ban its use? Their concern is that milk from bST-treated cows has higher levels of something called insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1), a hormone that may increase cancer cell growth. The American Cancer Society says that some early studies found a connection between IGF-1 and the development of prostate, breast, colorectal, and other cancers. In 2019, Spanish <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page90" title="90"/>researchers conducted a study that covered nearly 850,000 people and found that although there “are some data indicating that higher consumption of dairy products could increase the risk of prostate cancer, the evidence is not consistent.”</p>
<p class="TXT">Well, that’s good enough for me! Is there any reason to drink milk that’s not outweighed by even the slightest possibility of getting cancer as a result? We all need calcium and the rest of the good things milk contains, but there are safer ways of getting them. Broccoli and broccoli sprouts, beans, nuts, seeds, dark leafy greens, sweet potatoes, and more all contain high levels of calcium.</p>
<p class="TXT">There’s also another issue with bST: its use increases the incidence of mastitis, an infection of breast tissue in dairy cows that’s treated with antibiotics. That’s bad because overuse of antibiotics in farming and elsewhere creates the possibility of future resistance to the drugs, meaning that someday we’ll have a harder time fighting off infections. And the tougher the fight, the stronger the antidote needs to be, creating a cascade of perils.</p>
<p class="TXT">Finally, I think the whole process of dairy farming is disgusting. Newborn calves are torn away from their mothers, which, as you can imagine, causes both animals distress. According to Austrian researchers, “Cattle are herd animals. As expected, all animals, whether they were reared with or without mothers, produced higher levels of the stress hormone cortisol when being isolated from the herd.” All this so we can have milk in our coffee or ice cream for dessert? I just don’t get it.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">As I’ve mentioned elsewhere, factory farms that house many thousands of large animals in cruel conditions are bad for the environment, the animals (duh), and existence itself. By now we all know this is true, and it’s time to stop acting as though we don’t. Making it even worse, we waste a huge amount of the milk we do produce. According to the USDA, more than 48 billion pounds of milk were sold in the United States in 2017, with <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page91" title="91"/>more than 99 million pounds, or 12 million gallons, wasted—spoiled before it could be consumed. At the height of the pandemic, the <span class="ital">New York Times</span> reported that midwestern farmers were dumping thousands of gallons of unsold fresh milk into lagoons and manure pits. That just makes it all seem even more disgraceful. How dare we do this! We torture these animals to get it, pump them full of chemicals, rip their babies away, and then have the audacity to waste their milk.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">We can learn to live without dairy products. The trend is already going in that direction; consumption of fluid milk is way down from its peak, even though we’re eating more cheese and yogurt than ever.</p>
<p class="TXT">If you still need milk, make sure it’s the best, most natural kind. Buying raw, unpasteurized milk is illegal in most places, I believe. But it <span class="ital">is</span> safe to buy dairy from small, organic producers that raise cows fed on grass only. Make sure your dairy products are clearly marked as being from animals not treated with the hormones rBST or rBGH. And even though use of antibiotics is waning in the milk business, it’s still out there. As with all agricultural products, the closer to your home it is produced, the fresher and more sustainable it’s probably going to be.</p>
<p class="TXT">I am not here to tell you what to do, what to consume. I don’t judge you at all. What I do want to share with you is the truth so that you can make more informed choices and we all can come together and demand better ways of doing things, better systems, better food, better products, and more humane practices.</p>
<p class="TXT">Try plant-based milks, which aren’t really milk but pack nutritional value all the same. True, only soy has comparable protein. And yes, vitamins A and D must be added, but after milk is pasteurized, it, too, needs the same fortification. So that’s a wash. Lots of plant milks also contain sugars, thickeners, emulsifiers, and other unnecessary “improvements,” so watch out for those. The best bet in this category is probably organic soy milk.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page92" title="92"/>If you’re still living under the illusion that milk is the champion source of calcium, think again. You can get the same amount of that important mineral by eating a cup and a quarter of spinach or black beans as you can from a cup of milk—and without the saturated fat, calories, or cruelty.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Meat, Poultry, and Eggs</p>
<p class="TXF">My diet is fully plant based and has been for more than fifteen years. I don’t eat any of the things we’re about to discuss.</p>
<p class="TXT">But I can tell you where the dangers lie without saying that you should drop all these foods from your diet completely—even though that’s what I believe. I’m not the food police, and I don’t want to tell you what to eat or not eat. I just see broken systems and toxic, poor-quality food that’s causing problems for people, animals, and the environment.</p>
<p class="TXT">Obviously, we’ve been eating animal foods forever, since the first hunter hurled a spear at a fellow wild living thing and brought it home for dinner (and I don’t mean as a guest). Meat provided us with necessary nutrients and kept us alive, so it’s hard to find fault with that. And we killed only what we needed. Animals eat other animals, too, after all.</p>
<p class="TXT">At some point along the way, we invented agriculture, which came to include domesticating animals so we could breed them in order to kill and eat them. From then on, things have gone downhill, with factory farming, appalling cruelty, and irresponsible practices that harm the people who eat animals and devastate our environment, thereby hurting everybody else, too, including those of us who never eat meat.</p>
<p class="TXT">I’m not going to get into the nutritional pros and cons of eating animal foods in this book. You’re probably aware of the ongoing dietary warfare among various factions—from my fellow vegans and vegetarians to omnivores to followers of the keto diet all the way down to the hard-core carnivores, who eat practically nothing <span class="ital">but</span> meat and claim to be in perfect health.</p>
<p class="TXT">I just want to talk about the Fatal Convenience of meat.</p>
<p class="TXT">We all know the importance of getting enough protein in our diet to <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page93" title="93"/>maintain sufficient lean body mass and support all our various physiological functions. The easiest way of fulfilling our need for protein, we’ve been led to believe, is by slapping a big steak onto the grill or sticking a chicken into the oven—or, more probable today, devouring a fast-food burger or some chicken nuggets. That’s the convenience part of the equation; there’s nothing easier than relying on meat or poultry to supply this necessary nutrient.</p>
<p class="TXT">Of course, protein isn’t all that meat supplies. Eating a steady diet of meat that’s been raised by conventional methods—meaning factory farms and all the horribleness that entails—has been credibly linked to heart disease and various cancers, the number one and number two killers of Americans. We eat way more meat than is necessary or healthy, and we suffer big time as a result. Livestock animals aren’t the only creatures dying due to our appetite for meat. But not all the dangers are readily apparent.</p>
<p class="TXT">When vast numbers of animals are crowded into tight spaces, as is common, diseases spread quickly and easily, which is why farmers began administering antibiotics. But they discovered a side benefit of doing so: animals that were given the drugs put on more weight in less time, meaning that the farmers made greater profits. Unfortunately, the antibiotics were passed on to humans, and there began to be a surge in antibiotic-resistant superbugs. The FDA acted quickly (for a change) and banned the nonmedical use of penicillin and tetracycline in farm animals. But due to pushback from the farm lobby, the ban has never really been enforced. This is worrisome because antibiotic-resistant bacteria cause more than 2.8 million infections and 162,000 deaths in the United States each year.</p>
<p class="TXT">Since the 1950s, the FDA has also allowed hormones to be given to cattle and sheep to promote rapid growth. The European Union, however, banned the use of hormones in farm animals back in 1981, fearing that their use could have “endocrine, developmental, immunological, neurobiological, immunotoxic, genotoxic and carcinogenic effects” on humans, particularly prepubescent children.</p>
<p class="TXT">The FDA contends that the levels of hormones given to farm animals <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page94" title="94"/>would be expected to have no harmful effect in humans based on extensive scientific study and review. However, a University of Rochester study examined beef consumption among pregnant women and then measured sperm concentration in their grown sons. They found that men whose moms had eaten the most beef had a sperm concentration that was 24 percent lower than those whose mothers had eaten less, suggesting that the hormones given to cattle might harm testicular development on fetuses in the womb.</p>
<p class="TXT">Beef, poultry, and eggs, because of the way they’re farmed and handled, are all vulnerable to infection by dangerous pathogens such as <span class="ital">E. coli</span>, salmonella, and other bacteria. You may recall the famous 1986 outbreak of mad cow disease, which attacks the brains of cattle, killing them. You might not realize that when humans eat infected meat, they can come to suffer from Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), which is always fatal.</p>
<p class="TXT">But all those health hazards have nothing to do with meat, poultry, or eggs per se—they’re all caused by how Big Meat treats its products and by extension its customers: you.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">So much has already been said and written about the industrial meat complex’s cruelty to living creatures that I can’t really think of anything new to add. I guarantee that if you saw how those animals are treated when they’re alive and when they are slaughtered, you would be more likely to puke than to chow down. According to one estimate, the average meat-eating adult has consumed 2,400 entire animals, so just imagine all the merciless horrors and killing that have already been done on your behalf, paid for by your grocery dollars. I’ll leave it at that.</p>
<p class="TXT">Instead, let’s think about all the cruelty to the environment that comes from animal agriculture. The technical term for industrial or factory farms is concentrated animal feeding operations, or CAFOs. The idea is to take a large number of animals and confine them in as small an area as possible for their entire lives—eating, pooping, laying eggs, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page95" title="95"/>producing milk, and growing fat enough to be slaughtered. These animals don’t forage for food, eat bugs, or graze on grass. They are given “feed,” often government-subsidized cheap corn and other grains.</p>
<p class="TXT">According to the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC), “The average pig farm grew from 945 animals in 1992 to 4,646 in 2004, with the animals often confined to spaces only slightly larger than their bodies.” A large, concentrated feeding operation could have “at least 1,000 beef cattle, 700 dairy cows, 2,500 large pigs, or 82,000 egg-laying hens.” What kind of impact do you think that might have on the environment?</p>
<p class="TXT">According to the NRDC, policy makers have long known that big industrial farms are major polluters, which was why the original 1972 Clean Water Act required the EPA to regulate farms just as it does factories. Unsurprisingly, the law hasn’t been enforced; NRDC’s decade’s worth of research found that “the EPA has left health threats largely unmonitored and lacks basic information” about most industrial farms, “including their location, how many animals they have, and how much waste they produce.”</p>
<p class="TXT">According to a study published in the journal <span class="ital">Nature Food</span>, 57 percent of agriculture-related greenhouse gas emissions come from producing animal-based feed—not food for us but food to grow animals. The researchers calculated that most of the world’s cropland is used to sustain livestock, not people. Roughly 500 million tons of manure are produced annually by factory-farmed livestock and poultry—three times the amount we humans create. Before factory farms, manure was part of the sustainable cycle of a farm. It fertilized the soil. But when so many animals produce so much manure in relatively small spaces, it’s no longer beneficial to the soil and needs to be removed.</p>
<p class="TXT">Where does it go? Into pits. Pools, really. In some cases, it is used as compost or fertilizer, turned into fiber, or even used to create energy. Unfortunately, a lot of it ends up in our water. The EPA says that manure is the primary source of nitrogen and phosphorus in our groundwater, which kills fish and plant life. Manure runoff also introduces harmful bacteria and viruses into water. <span class="ital">E. coli</span> that seeps into water from manure <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page96" title="96"/>can lead to deadly infections, especially among children and the elderly. In 2021, cow manure−contaminated water in private wells was the number one cause of gastrointestinal illness in Kewaunee County, Wisconsin, causing 230 of 301 cases that year.</p>
<p class="TXT">Raising animals also requires a lot of precious water; livestock raising accounts for an estimated 43 percent of all water used in the global food system. Also, keep in mind that grazing animals require a lot of pasture land, which is often cleared by destroying forests.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">I can’t resist one last opportunity to answer this question honestly. Stop eating animal foods, or at least begin decreasing the amount you and your family consume. Lots of people now follow the “meatless Monday” regimen, giving up meat one day a week. You’ll be healthier, you’ll be helping the environment, and you’ll be giving your karma a break.</p>
<p class="TXT">Then, learn how to get your protein elsewhere. Abandon the myth that you can’t get complete protein from plant sources. According to the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, “Protein from a variety of plant foods, eaten during the course of a day, supplies enough of all indispensable (essential) amino acids when caloric requirements are met.” It suggests that regularly consuming beans, lentils, and soy products will ensure that you get all the protein you need.</p>
<p class="TXT">Beans especially are a tasty and cheap way to do this; an analysis by the World Resources Institute found that beans and legumes cost less than 2.5 cents per gram of protein compared to more than 4 cents per gram for beef and that switching from meat or poultry to beans can significantly reduce agricultural resource use and greenhouse gas emissions. It’s a win-win.</p>
<p class="TXT">If you must eat meat, at least make healthy choices. According to a 2022 study, consumption of grass-fed beef “could exert protective effects against a number of diseases ranging from cancer to cardiovascular disease (CVD) as evidenced by the increased functional omega-3 PUFA and <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page97" title="97"/>decreased undesirable saturated fats.” A UK study found that “access to forage, whether fresh or conserved, is a key influencing factor for meat fatty acid profile, and there is increasing evidence that pasture access is particularly beneficial for meat’s nutritional quality.”</p>
<p class="TXT">And buy organic meat, meaning from animals that were not given antibiotics or growth hormones.</p>
<p class="TXT">Buy eggs from pastured chickens. Researchers at Penn State compared the eggs from chickens who foraged on alfalfa, red and white clover, or mixed cool-season grasses to those from hens fed the type of feed used in factory farms. The natural feed birds’ eggs had twice as much vitamin E and long-chain omega-3 fats, more than double the total omega-3 fatty acids, and less than half the ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids. Their vitamin A content was 38 percent higher. But the pastured hens were smaller than commercial birds and laid fewer eggs—which is probably why farmers prefer to keep their chickens confined indoors.</p>
<p class="TXT">For more details on the various labels and certifications, see the EWG’s Decoding Meat and Dairy Product Labels page at ewg.org.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Fish and Other Seafood</p>
<p class="TXF">Seafood has been a staple for populations living close to water ever since the ancient Egyptians went trolling with spears, nets, and rods, and likely long before then, when we fished with our bare hands. As sources of lean protein, healthy fats, and other important nutrients, aquatic animals are better for us than meat or poultry. Big fish eat little fish for a good reason (aside from the fact that their choices are somewhat limited).</p>
<p class="TXT">Naturally, we love fish so much that we’ve totally screwed them up as a source of healthy nutrition. We did so mostly by wrecking their habitats, fresh and salt water. Let’s run down the list.</p>
<p class="TXT">We’ve long known that mercury spewed into the air by burning coal winds up in our water. And the longer a fish lives, the more mercury it accumulates, which is why big predators—tuna, swordfish, sharks—are the most contaminated with this poisonous heavy metal. But a study of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page98" title="98"/>trout and bass in fifty lakes in Idaho, Oregon, and Washington found mercury in all samples, with 11 percent exceeding the amount deemed safe by the EPA.</p>
<p class="TXT">It’s especially harmful to children and babies and can even be fatal. According to the CDC, “Mercury can pass from a mother to her baby through the placenta during pregnancy and, in smaller amounts, through breast milk after birth. Exposure to mercury can affect the infant’s brain and nervous system development during pregnancy and after birth.” The FDA recommends that pregnant and breastfeeding women completely avoid eating shark, king mackerel, tilefish, swordfish, and tuna and eat freshwater fish like pike, walleye, muskellunge, and bass only in moderation.</p>
<p class="TXT">But all adults can be harmed if they go overboard with fish. You might remember when the actor Jeremy Piven had to bow out of a Broadway play in 2008; he suddenly had trouble remembering his lines, lost his sense of balance, and had extreme fatigue. It turned out he had mercury poisoning—he had been eating sushi twice a day, and fish, he said, was his only source of protein for twenty years.</p>
<p class="TXT">We also need to worry about the lethal “forever chemicals.” One study found that people who ate the most fish also had the highest levels of three different chemicals that have been linked to cancer, thyroid disease, and other serious ailments. Because of PFASs’ persistence in the environment, including bodies of water, fish are a carrier of these chemicals, which we then absorb. The study determined that “seven PFAS were detected in at least 30 percent of participants” and found that shellfish consumption was associated with every PFAS except one.</p>
<p class="TXT">A study in Norway suggested that fish and shellfish are a major dietary source of three “forever chemicals,” contributing “38 percent of the estimated dietary intakes of perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), 93 percent of perfluoroundecanoic acid (PFUnDA) and 81 percent of perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (PFOS).”</p>
<p class="TXT">Wow! That study even blew me away.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page99" title="99"/>The pesticide DDT is no longer manufactured in this country. The same is true of polychlorinated biphenyls, or PCBs, widely used industrial chemicals that have been banned here since 1979 and internationally since 2001. These famously toxic chemicals have been linked to cancer, nervous system damage, reproductive disorders, and disruption of the immune system.</p>
<p class="TXT">But they still persist in our waters. A study of 540 US rivers found PCBs in 93.5 percent of the samples and DDT in 98.7 percent. They were in higher concentrations in fish from urban than nonurban rivers, and although DDT was detected more frequently, it was at lower levels than PCBs, which exceeded human health cancer-screening values in nearly half the samples. The EPA found that the highest concentrations of PCBs in fish was in the Great Lakes. According to the Environmental Defense Fund, the EPA has issued PCB advisories for more than 2 million lake acres and 130,000 river miles since 2003, meaning that people are urged to limit their consumption of fish from those areas.</p>
<p class="TXT">A Chinese study found that among seafood eaters, fish contributed 57 percent of dietary intake of DDT and mollusks 38 percent, which means that fish not only hold on to DDT but pass it along to us. PCBs tend to be found in bottom feeders such as striped bass, bluefish, eel, and sea trout, as well as predators such as bass, lake trout, and walleye. Farmed salmon that are fed ground-up fish have higher levels than do wild-caught salmon. And PCBs are slow to go—the Environmental Defense Fund estimates that it can take five or more years for them to dissipate from women’s bodies, which is of special concern if you’re pregnant, since fetuses can be exposed to these chemicals through the placenta.</p>
<p class="TXT">Generally speaking, wild-caught fish are healthier for us than farmed fish are (we’ll discuss this in detail a little farther down). But most fish we eat today is farmed. It’s cheaper, it’s better for the environment, and it’s easier for producers to control—essentially, we have turned water animals into an industrial product, as we did with land animals. But farmed <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page100" title="100"/>fish aren’t without problems, either. According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) Fisheries:</p>
<p class="EXT">Fish diseases occur naturally in the wild, but their effects often go unnoticed because dead fish quickly become prey. Disease events can occur in fish farms because 1) fish are reared at higher densities than nature, increasing contact between fish; 2) infected fish are not removed as promptly from the farm as they would be by natural predators; 3) farmed fish are more closely and easily observed than wild fish. Thus pathogens that normally exist in low numbers and do not cause disease in the wild may result in disease in farmed fish.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Fishing old school with a pole at your local lake doesn’t damage anything, especially if you pay attention to regulations that protect aquatic populations. But commercial fishing is a whole other thing—to satisfy our hunger, a huge amount of harm is being done to the planet, especially the seas. We’re devastating the populations of the fish we want to keep on eating, so that at some point seafood may be a rare and costly treat. Modern fishing technology is damaging the rest of the environment, too. Here’s how Greenpeace summed it up:</p>
<p class="EXTTF">We’ve already removed at least two-thirds of the large fish in the ocean, and one in three fish populations have collapsed since 1950. Put simply, there are too many boats chasing too few fish.</p>
<p class="EXTTM">Overfishing is threatening food security for hundreds of millions of people and destroying ocean ecosystems worldwide.</p>
<p class="EXTTM">In fact, the fishing industry can’t even sell everything it catches. One commercial fishing boat, which can be the size of a cruise ship, can catch more fish in one haul than hundreds of small-scale boats can in a year.</p>
<p class="EXTTM">Not only is the amount of fish we’re catching unsustainable, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page101" title="101"/>the way we’re catching it also has serious consequences. As fishing techniques have evolved to catch the most fish possible, they’ve also become more destructive.</p>
<p class="EXTTM">For example, bottom trawling—in which giant nets are run along the sea floor picking up or crushing whatever is in their path—is particularly damaging to fragile coral and sponge habitats. Longlining—a technique that consists of baiting thousands of hooks along miles-long fishing lines—snags thousands of creatures that are typically thrown back into the water dead or dying.</p>
<p class="EXTTL">These “unwanted” species, called bycatch, often include turtles, albatross, sharks, manta rays, and even dolphins, many of which are endangered. Every year, commercial fishing kills as many as 300,000 whales, dolphins, and porpoises and about 100 million sharks.</p>
<p class="TXT">Yes, you read that correctly. This system is so unbelievably broken, it blows me away.</p>
<p class="TXT">One way to reduce overfishing might be to eliminate government subsidies to the fishing industry. A 2009 study published in the <span class="ital">North American Journal of Fisheries</span> found that $713 million per year of direct subsidies, or financial support, goes to the US fishing industry, roughly half of which could contribute to overfishing.</p>
<p class="TXT">“Seas are a critical source of protein for billions of people,” the environmentalist Paul Hawken observed. “Small-scale fishing provides work or subsistence harvests to over 100 million people. Over the past three decades, however, the number of overharvested fish stocks have more than tripled due to industrial-scale fishing, risking permanent loss of iconic species such as Atlantic cod, bluefin tuna, and a wide range of sharks. The unchecked expansion of the global fishing fleet, often with government support, is largely responsible for this state of affairs, including destructive harvesting practices like bottom-trawling and shark finning.”</p>
<p class="TXT">Peter Neill, the director of the World Ocean Observatory, wrote, “If <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page102" title="102"/>we were to declare a moratorium on industrial scale fisheries for a term of five years, we would maintain most of today’s fishing-related employment, produce most of the catch that today reaches market for human consumption, reduce fuel costs dramatically, reduce subsidies even more dramatically, and otherwise invest in the future of the industry through its return to health, diversity, and sustainable future supply.”</p>
<p class="TXT">The practice known as bottom trawling—fishing with heavy nets that drag across the seabed—emits roughly the same amount of carbon dioxide as aviation does. The greenhouse gas release isn’t just from the boats, it’s also because carbon in the seabed is released when the ocean floor is churned up. Even discarded nets are a problem. One study found that 86 percent of the 42,000 tons of plastic in the Great Pacific Garbage Patch was fishing nets.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">According to the Environmental Working Group, our best bets for fish containing healthy omega-3 fatty acids and low levels of mercury are wild-caught salmon, sardines, mussels, rainbow trout, and Atlantic mackerel. These are likely caught using sustainable practices. Also recommended are oysters, anchovies, pollock/imitation crab, and herring. If you catch your own, pay attention to advisories in your area by checking the EPA’s fish advisory online database at epa.gov. The agency monitors pollutants and provides recommendations for which fish to avoid or limit.</p>
<p class="TXT">To reduce exposure to PCBs, don’t overdo your consumption of salmon and bluefish, and don’t deep-fry fish, because that seals chemical pollutants into its fat. If you eat canned tuna, skip the white and stick with light. <span class="ital">Consumer Reports</span> tested and found that white albacore tuna contains significantly more mercury than light tuna (but every sample contained mercury). And although the Environmental Defense Fund recommends consuming canned light tuna only and even that less than once <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page103" title="103"/>a week, <span class="ital">Consumer Reports</span> suggests that pregnant women avoid it entirely. As an alternative, it recommends canned Alaskan salmon, which is lower in mercury and PCBs.</p>
<p class="TXT">Keep this in mind when you’re thinking of having sashimi or sushi for dinner: according to the Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, “Cooking is known to reduce mercury content in fish by up to 30 percent.”</p>
<p class="TXT">Everybody knows that salmon is extremely healthy, which accounts for its popularity, but then the question is: wild caught or farmed? Consider this:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Wild has fewer calories and saturated fat, although farmed has higher levels of omega-3 fatty acids. Winner: wild.</li>
<li>PCB levels are sixteen times as high in farmed fish as in wild. Winner: wild.</li>
<li>A study from Norway found that farmed salmon had some of the lowest levels of PFASs among 246 fish sampled, while Finnish research claims that wild salmon is one of the highest sources of PFASs in the national diet. Winner: farmed.</li>
<li>Mercury levels in salmon are low, and there’s not much difference when it comes to wild versus farmed. Winner: tie.</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">So wild caught looks like the smart choice, but in 2015, the <span class="ital">New York Times</span> reported that a study using DNA analysis on eighty-two wild salmon samples sold by restaurants and stores found that two-thirds had been mislabeled. The group that conducted the analysis, Oceana, claims that seafood fraud is a big problem in the United States, and encourages citizens to petition the FDA to trace seafood from boat to plate to ensure that it is safe, legally caught, and honestly labeled.</p>
<p class="TXT">You can also play it safe by eating aquatic flora rather than fauna. Seaweed is a nutritional powerhouse, and the farms actually benefit the ecosystem: they reduce ocean acidification, capture carbon, reduce nitrogen levels and toxic algae blooms, and enhance biodiversity.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page104" title="104"/>Some online resources:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>NOAA’s FishWatch (fishwatch.gov) lets you look up fish to see how depleted each species is, what fishing rules are in place, and the impact fishing has on their habitats.</li>
<li>You can also use EWG’s Seafood Calculator (ewg.org/consumer-guides/ewgs-consumer-guide-seafood) to get a list of recommendations based on your age and weight.</li>
</ul>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Processed Foods</p>
<p class="TXF">By now we’ve been messing around with our food for thousands of years. For most of that time it’s been a healthy thing to do.</p>
<p class="TXT">We fermented, we cultured, we pickled and brined, we salted and dried—we took actions to preserve foods long before we had refrigerators and freezers, so the practice has always had positive goals. Beans and grains would be inedible if we didn’t process them first, and without processing we couldn’t enjoy hummus, cheese, yogurt, coffee, chocolate, wine, beer . . . the list goes on and on.</p>
<p class="TXT">So how did “processed food” wind up meaning unhealthy junk?</p>
<p class="TXT">It’s a predictable story. As long as we were processing foods in traditional, old-school ways—meaning as little as possible and always with respect for what we would wind up eating—we were safe. In fact, fermented vegetables like sauerkraut and kimchi are actually more nutritious because of processing.</p>
<p class="TXT">But then at some point in the twentieth century, the food engineers went to work. They began not just processing foods but inventing totally new edible substances—I call them that because they don’t deserve to be called food. The scientists took things found in nature, such as grains and fats, stripped them of everything healthy, added artificial flavoring, dyes, preservatives, and other weirdness, sold them cheaply, and somehow convinced people to eat them.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page105" title="105"/>They are sold in food stores, but they’re not food! Doesn’t seem to matter to a lot of people.</p>
<p class="TXT">Enormous marketing budgets capable of blanketing TV time, especially when kids are watching, definitely helped. Making those junk foods what the experts call “hyperpalatable”—meaning better tasting than anything Mother Nature can manage—did the rest. Why eat an ear of fresh organic corn when you can have some unnaturally flavored, ultrasweet/ultrasalty, addictive popcorn instead?</p>
<p class="TXT">That’s how processing food went from being a cool thing to a nutritional nightmare.</p>
<p class="TXT">Want to know if the purchase you’re considering is the evil kind of processed? Easy. Does it have a long list of ingredients, most of which sound as though they belong in a chemistry lab? Is it contained in a brightly colored, beautifully designed bag or box? Is it loaded with sugars or salts and pretty much devoid of fiber, vitamins, and minerals? Are your kids begging you to buy it? Does it have its own TikTok account?</p>
<p class="TXT">Like I said, it’s easy to figure out exactly what we need to avoid. It’s common sense. Here are a few of the main culprits that make processed foods so toxic.</p>
<p class="TXT">Cured meats taste good—but a major part of the curing process is the addition of sodium nitrite or nitrate, which slows down spoilage, improves the flavor, and fends off botulism. Their pink hue is a result of the chemical reaction between the sodium nitrite and the meat proteins. Nitrates are found naturally in fruit and vegetables, but when consumed in cold cuts, they cause problems.</p>
<p class="TXT">Consumption of processed meat has been linked to an increase in certain types of cancer, including colorectal and stomach, so much so that the American Institute for Cancer Research recommends avoiding them altogether. It found that for every 50 grams (about one hot dog or two slices of ham) eaten daily, the risk of developing colorectal cancer rises by 16 percent. Cured meats have also been linked to hypertension; diabetes; <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page106" title="106"/>heart disease; chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, especially among smokers; and higher all-cause mortality.</p>
<p class="TXT">High-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) can be found in everything from soda to bread. It’s essentially ultraprocessed corn designed for powerful sweetness, which makes it a very cheap way to add sugar to just about anything. As HFCS in foods became more common, scientists noticed an increase in obesity, which led to questions of whether humans digest this sweetener differently than we do natural sugar. Between 1970 and 1990, consumption of HFCS increased by 1,000 percent. Eating too much isolated sugar, no matter the source, will increase risk of obesity, cancer, and metabolic diseases.</p>
<p class="TXT">Margarine, shortening, and palm oil will soften and spoil over time, which was why manufacturers began processing them with hydrogen. Hydrogenation keeps ingredients stable, but it also creates trans fatty acids, or trans fats, which have been shown to increase the risk of heart attacks, stroke, and inflammation. In 2015, the FDA determined that partially hydrogenated oils should be removed from all foods, and now they’re no longer used. Fully hydrogenated oils are not as bad as trans fats, but they still contain a lot of saturated fat, which is unhealthy when consumed in large quantities. You can identify them by reading the product label—for instance, it might say either “palm oil” or “hydrogenated palm oil.”</p>
<p class="TXT">Butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) and butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) are used as preservatives in some foods because they stabilize fats and prevent them from going rancid. They’re also found in breakfast cereals, some desserts, chewing gum, and glazed fruits. According to the National Toxicology Program, BHA is “reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen” based on animal studies, though human studies have been inconclusive. But the FDA claims that it’s generally recognized as safe for use in food.</p>
<p class="TXT">Whenever there are conflicting opinions like this, the wise decision is to avoid them. Why take unnecessary chances with your health?</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page107" title="107"/>Interestingly, no link has been found between BHT and cancer, and it may actually provide some benefits; a study at New York Medical College found that it might even help prevent the disease.</p>
<p class="TXT">Titanium dioxide, a powdery white mineral, is in everything from paint to sunscreen to candy, gum, sauces, and pastry; it makes things bright white and prevents spoilage. In 2021, the European Food Safety Authority declared that it’s no longer considered safe in food, saying that particles “can accumulate in the body.” The worry is that titanium dioxide can damage our DNA and lead to cancer.</p>
<p class="TXT">When you fry or cook potatoes and certain other foods at high temps, a substance called acrylamide forms through a chemical reaction between the sugars and amino acids. An analysis of thirty-two studies found that among nonsmokers, dietary acrylamide consumption was associated with an increase in endometrial and ovarian cancers. It’s what makes potato chips and French fries taste so damn good, but again—is it worth the danger?</p>
<p class="TXT">Synthetic food dyes, from FD&amp;C Yellow No. 5 to FD&amp;C Red No. 40, are used to create the vibrant colors of everything from candy to cereal to ice cream. The Center for Science in the Public Interest has long petitioned the FDA to ban these dyes because they can increase behavior problems in children, including hyperactivity. Some dyes, including Red No. 3, might also be carcinogenic, while Yellow No. 5 can cause allergic reactions. Europe requires a warning label on foods containing certain dyes, but the FDA hasn’t taken similar action here.</p>
<p class="TXT">Anything that comes in plastic bags or containers that are meant to be heated in the microwave might leach endocrine-disrupting chemicals into your food. A study from 2011 found that plastic containers, even if they’re BPA free, still released harmful chemicals. And it’s not limited to microwaves—anytime you heat food in plastic you might be releasing estrogenic chemicals. And if you ever microwave butter-flavored popcorn, don’t inhale the steam when you open the bag: a study of factory workers showed that the butter-flavored chemical diacetyl, when mixed with air, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page108" title="108"/>can cause lung disease. Some food manufacturers have switched from diacetyl to the supposedly safer 2,3-pentanedione, but recent studies have found that it might be just as bad.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">The problems begin even before we start eating. Those “forever chemicals” I keep bringing up? A study by <span class="ital">Consumer Reports</span> of more than a hundred food-packaging products found PFASs in everything from paper bags for fast-food French fries and hamburger wrappers to disposable salad bowls and single-use paper plates. It’s there so the wrapper doesn’t stick to the hot food.</p>
<p class="TXT">Even packaging that claimed to be moving away from these toxic chemicals still had detectable levels. When PFASs are phased out, it often means that manufacturers are using different chemicals, with no guarantee that they won’t do similar damage to us and the environment. According to <span class="ital">Chemical &amp; Engineering News</span>, “Citing competition, most paper and packaging companies won’t discuss the products they’re making.”</p>
<p class="TXT">Gee, I wonder why!</p>
<p class="TXT">In 2022, the FDA banned another harmful ingredient found in fast-food packaging: phthalates, those notorious hormone disrupters. In fact, it banned twenty-three of them. But nine more of the chemicals are still allowed. It never ends.</p>
<p class="TXT">No matter which evil substances your food packaging contains, it accounts for almost 23 percent of landfill materials. Nearly a quarter! Just look around wherever people gather outdoors, like at beaches, lakes, and parks, and see all the food-related trash—a lot of which winds up in the bellies of the poor birds, beasts, and fish that mistake it for food.</p>
<p class="TXT">A final environmental hazard associated with processed foods, one that’s been getting some attention lately, is the devastation caused by harvesting palm oil. All over the world, forests are being razed and animal habitats destroyed due to the demand for this fat, which is used not only in food but in a long list of personal care products, such as moisturizer. I <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page109" title="109"/>wish I could offer some advice on how to combat this terrible situation, but the only thing to do is avoid any product containing palm oil.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">As I like to say, it’s better to pay the grocer than the doctor and smarter to trust the farmer than the pharmacist.</p>
<p class="TXT">What I mean is that even though it’s slightly more expensive to eat natural food that’s only minimally processed (if at all), instead of things that have been mass produced by mammoth industrial corporations, it’s worth it in the long run. In the short run, too—you’ll feel better and look more beautiful.</p>
<p class="TXT">A study done in 2013 found that the healthiest diets cost about $1.50 more per day than the least healthy. Even if inflation has made that gap larger, you and your family are worth a couple extra bucks a day.</p>
<p class="TXT">Speaking of dollars, a big reason our food environment sucks is because most government agricultural subsidies go to corn, soybeans, wheat, and rice—all of which are refined and turned into food that’s empty of nutrition and full of chemicals and other junk. If we all contacted our elected officials and complained, maybe federal food policy would become sane. A study found that if the government were to create a subsidy to reduce the price of fruits and vegetables by 10 percent, it would prevent or postpone cardiovascular disease mortality by 150,500 lives by 2030.</p>
<p class="TXT">But the government isn’t going to do its part, so we all have to do ours. When you’re shopping at the supermarket, stick to the perimeter, where whole foods such as fruits and vegetables, fish, meat, and dairy products are sold. Don’t neglect the frozen food section, where you can find vegetables and fruits picked at their maximum ripeness. This aisle is the frugal shopper’s best friend.</p>
<p class="TXT">In the center aisles, stick with foods that have as few ingredients as possible, and read the labels before you buy. Manufacturers are legally required to tell you all the nasty, unnecessary, toxic junk that’s in the “food” they’re trying to sell you. Here’s a good rule of thumb: if there’s <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page110" title="110"/>an ingredient listed on the label that you couldn’t buy on its own, it’s probably bad for you.</p>
<p class="TXT">Remember, just because you can find it in a grocery store doesn’t mean you should eat it!</p>
<p class="TXT">Whenever possible, buy your food close to the source—at farmers’ markets and roadside farm stands, for instance. All over the country, small farms are popping up, usually run by idealists who want to grow nutritious produce using natural, sustainable, responsible methods. You may pay a little more, but it’s worth it.</p>
<p class="TXT">My best advice for those who are ready to commit to healthy, budget-friendly eating? Grow your own! Even with a little space you can create an organic garden and enjoy the freshest, cleanest vegetables possible at the lowest cost. If all you have is space for a window box or hydroponic garden, plant some herbs or lettuces.</p>
<p class="TXT">Now learn to cook all that good food you’ve grown. When we prepare our own meals, we know exactly what we’re eating. And we can take pride in all the wonderful, delicious, healthy things our labors have produced. The more time people spend making food at home, the higher the quality of their diets, common sense tells us and the research proves.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Water and Other Drinks</p>
<p class="TXF">Our bodies are around two-thirds water, a fact that amazes me every time I think of it. How can water take so many different forms—hair, skin, blood, organs? Even our bones are 30 percent water! We’re like walking oceans.</p>
<p class="TXT">Of course, we all take great care to drink only clean, uncontaminated water to replenish what our bodies lose in the course of a day. Naturally, that attitude extends to the other beverages we consume because, after all, they’re mostly water, too.</p>
<p class="TXT">If only that were true!</p>
<p class="TXT">Instead, it’s now nearly impossible to drink nontoxic beverages. It’s not enough to avoid the junk that is obviously bad for our health, such <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page111" title="111"/>as soda. According to the federal government, most US tap water is contaminated with chemicals proven to cause kidney and testicular cancer, thyroid disease, high cholesterol levels, liver damage, and immune system dysfunction. If we can’t trust plain water, we’re really in trouble.</p>
<p class="TXT">How did it come to this? It’s because of all the poisons and other junk we release into our environment. Most of the planet is covered in water—so where else could all that garbage we create go except into the drink? All the industrial pollutants, all the exhaust from all the internal combustion engines, every little bit of toxic waste we create—it has to settle somewhere. It settles first in our water, then in us.</p>
<p class="TXT">According to the CDC, virtually every person ever tested has some PFASs or PFOSs—the “forever chemicals” I keep talking about—in his or her blood. How did they get there? From drinking tap water, most likely. These chemicals have been found in the water supply of more than 2,800 communities in all fifty states, meaning that every day more than 200 million Americans are drinking potentially dangerous toxins—substances that can cause several cancers and a long list of other ailments.</p>
<p class="TXT">How bad is the situation? In 2022, researchers at the University of Stockholm announced that “based on the latest U.S. guidelines for PFOA in drinking water, rainwater everywhere would be judged unsafe to drink.” As I write this, various federal and local agencies say they’re going to crack down on the permissible presence of these chemicals in our drinking water. They’ve been saying that for a while now, but they’re not doing much to protect us.</p>
<p class="TXT">If you thought you were safe because you don’t rely on tap water, think again: even well water has been tested and found to be contaminated with these and other shady chemicals. They’re everywhere. The EPA compiles a list of tainted sources, including those in private drinking water wells. And a report from the US Geological Survey found industrial toxins in untreated well water in Delaware.</p>
<p class="TXT">You may have heard about the microbits of plastic that pervade our oceans. But they are also in fresh water, such as rivers. A 2022 study from Northwestern University found microplastic levels in water capable of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page112" title="112"/>resulting in ninety thousand pieces of plastic ingested annually by humans from bottled water and four thousand more from tap water, according to calculations. Microplastic consumption can lead to thyroid hormone disruption and may make us obese by altering the way we store fat and burn energy.</p>
<p class="TXT">Seriously, are we trying to hurt ourselves? The things we expect to be safe, like turning on the faucet, are messing with our hormones!</p>
<p class="TXT">It’s tempting to believe that if we discover an unspoiled natural spring far from civilization, we can drink freely and without fear of contaminants. No way. You should not sip from a natural water source, no matter how perfect it looks. In nature, water travels far, absorbing bacteria, parasites, and viruses along the way. Bottled spring water has been tested and/or filtered in some way to ensure that it’s pathogen free.</p>
<p class="TXT">Lead in water is still a problem, believe it or not, commonly found in the pipes of older homes (which was what happened in Flint, Michigan). Drinking and absorbing too much of this metal can damage kidneys, increase the risk of developing hypertension, and cause reproductive problems. It’s also responsible for learning difficulties, lower IQ, and slow growth in children. Even if you live in a newer home with PVC pipes, your child could be drinking water from lead pipes still in use in schools and other old buildings.</p>
<p class="TXT">Once we go beyond water, the dangers multiply. Now we’re dealing with water plus. Soft drinks are a health hazard not only because they’re everywhere—is there any place left in America where you can’t buy a soda?—but also because they keep growing bigger. Before 1950, the average soft drink was six and a half ounces; today it’s twenty. Next time you’re at a convenience store, check out the cups at the soda station. They’re the size of buckets!</p>
<p class="TXT">The biggest worry, beyond the artificial colorings and flavorings, is sugar and high-fructose corn syrup. But don’t think that “diet” versions get you off the hook. Artificial sweeteners such as aspartame (in Diet Coke) and acesulfame-K (in Diet Pepsi) have both been linked to an <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page113" title="113"/>increased risk of cancer. Your soda will also probably contain citric acid, added as a preservative and flavor enhancer. All that acidity can damage tooth enamel. For all the calories we try to avoid, the obesity problem isn’t getting any better.</p>
<p class="TXT">Young people especially love sports drinks and energy drinks—anything that comes with the halo of athleticism and good health. Of course, the actual benefits are nonexistent, but the damage they may be doing is real. The original formula Gatorade (not all the variations), a legit electrolyte drink developed by scientists for the University of Florida Gators teams, is just water, sugar, salt, citric acid, and potassium—which is fine if you’re doing two-a-day workouts under a broiling tropical sun. It’s totally unnecessary otherwise. And it contains Red No. 40 dye. There is virtually no evidence that it hydrates you more than clean water with a pinch of unrefined Himalayan salt. Skip the fake-colored drinks in plastic and just drink the right water.</p>
<p class="TXT">I’ve seen estimates that sports drinks make up about 26 percent of youths’ sugar-sweetened beverage intake, thereby increasing the risk of obesity, health problems such as type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. Even gout! Like soda, they can hurt our teeth by increasing the risk of cavities. For most of us, water is good enough for rehydration, unless we’re engaging in vigorous exercise for more than an hour and sweating profusely.</p>
<p class="TXT">Energy drinks often contain large amounts of caffeine; an eight-ounce cup of coffee contains about 100 grams, compared to a can of Monster, a popular brand, which provides 160 grams. The amount of caffeine contained in a cup and a half of coffee is a lot for a kid and can even cause intoxication. Of all caffeine overdoses reported in 2007, nearly half occurred in children under nineteen. There’s even some concern that energy drink consumption can increase arterial stiffness in healthy young people, possibly because of the way it raises blood pressure. If you really need to boost your energy artificially, have a cup of coffee.</p>
<p class="TXT">Of course, we used to think that coffee drinking was an unhealthy <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page114" title="114"/>habit due to the caffeine. Now that view has changed. Moderate consumption, no more than two or three cups a day, may even be good for us; there’s research that links it to lower rates of heart disease, heart failure, arrhythmia, and stroke. It might even protect against neurodegenerative diseases, improve asthma, and lower the risk of certain gastrointestinal diseases. Coffee actually contains antioxidants!</p>
<p class="TXT">The problem is that nowadays, many of us prefer what are known as “coffee drinks”—a little coffee plus a whole lot of other stuff thrown in, including sugar and flavorings. Of course, we have no idea what’s in those flavorings. And the caloric punch these elaborate, expensive drinks pack is huge: a Starbucks Pumpkin Spice Latte, for example, contains 50 grams of sugar, 14 grams of fat, and 380 calories. As a comparison, a sixteen-ounce black coffee contains 5 calories.</p>
<p class="TXT">I do not drink coffee, and I believe it can be extremely acidic for the body. I get my antioxidants from many other sources, such as fresh green juices, blueberries, cacao, medicinal mushrooms, and others.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">The global popularity of bottled water created an entirely new level of environmental disaster. According to a 2019 report from the Reuters news agency, every year 481.6 billion plastic water bottles are sold globally—about a million bottles a minute. Fewer than half of the discarded bottles are collected for recycling, and just 7 percent of those are actually turned into new bottles. Most end up in landfills or the ocean. Younger readers might have a hard time believing this, but not so long ago bottled water wasn’t even a thing. Somehow we all survived. The problem isn’t limited to the bottles; according to a Greenpeace study of 367 waste treatment facilities, their shrink-sleeved labels make most beverage bottles nonrecyclable, so pretty much anything that isn’t category PET 1 or HDPE 2 heads to a landfill. Just because you put something into your recycling bin doesn’t mean it won’t wind up on a huge, nonbiodegradable heap somewhere.</p>
<p class="H2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page115" title="115"/>Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">Drink as much clean water as possible! How’s that for a simple solution? Remember, you’re mostly water, so you need to replenish what you’re constantly losing through breathing, sweating, and urinating. If you feel the need to drink any other beverages, be cautious, because most of the choices available are unhealthy.</p>
<p class="TXT">As we’ve seen, we can’t trust any of our sources—tap water, well water, bottled water—to be uncontaminated either by bacteria, carcinogens, or other junk. Bottom line: We all need some kind of water filtration setup. Trust me, it’s no longer optional. In my home I have a reverse osmosis system, which pumps the water through a series of filters that removes virtually all particles, even the ones too small to see, so all that’s left is pure water. I add a pinch of pink Himalayan salt to every glass—I don’t taste it, but it remineralizes the water, which is extremely important.</p>
<p class="TXT">Instead of buying bottled water, get a good nonplastic—glass-lined or metal—bottle and use it. A lot. You’ll be doing yourself and the rest of the planet a huge favor. But don’t give up on your right to nonpoisonous tap water—we can all agitate for change. On its website, the EPA makes available local Consumer Confidence Reports (epa.gov/ccr), where every municipality must publish an annual water quality report, listing exactly what’s in its drinking water, from bacteria to lead to the chemicals used to treat the water. Support legislation and the legislators who are trying to make our water safe again. Reach out to office seekers who are willing to hold industry responsible for polluting our waterways.</p>
<p class="TXT">When it comes to our health habits, we’re so fixated on what we eat that we sometimes forget to think about what we drink. But it all goes into the same body and is of equal importance. A toxin is a toxin, and an unhealthy ingredient is an unhealthy ingredient no matter how you consume it.</p>
<p class="TXT">According to the CDC, sweetened drinks are the leading source of added sugars in the American diet. Keep that in mind next time you <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page116" title="116"/>wonder why you can’t control your weight. Don’t be conned by “sports” or “energy” drinks that use a halo of athleticism to hide the fact that they’re full of sugar, caffeine, and other junk no athlete needs. Read labels, and ask yourself if any beverage is going to make you healthier than plain old water. I’m guessing that the answer is no.</p>
</body>
</html>