<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Fatal Conveniences</title>
  <link href="../Styles/FatalConveniences.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1096cf69-c1c2-4b94-ac1d-5d952fe64055" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<p class="CN"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH004"><span class="blue"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page36" title="36"/>4</span></a></p>
<p class="CT"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH004"><span class="blue">Personal Care Products</span></a></p>
<p class="TXFF"><span class="boldsc">OF ALL THE CATEGORIES OF FATAL CONVENIENCES,</span> this is the one that really makes me shake my head. Maybe it’s the term itself. These products claim to provide us with care for our most personal physical needs. Instead, they often do the exact opposite: they harm us and put us at risk, maybe not intentionally, by containing ingredients that either are untested or have been proven to be sketchy, irritating, toxic, even carcinogenic.</p>
<p class="TXT">The fact that we buy these goods in pharmacies and stores devoted to beauty and well-being makes it even worse. It gives them a halo of health and wholesomeness, so we don’t question whether they’re necessary or good for us or even if they do what they say they will.</p>
<p class="TXT">Try this: Pick out a random personal care product you own or one from a store shelf, then read the mind-boggling list of ingredients—those endless, scary chemical names in type so tiny it’s almost illegible. Then ask yourself if they really sound like substances you want on your skin, in your mouth, close to your eyes, or near your children. But give those industrial chemicals a cool brand name, a soothing image on the container (green leaves, flowers, etcetera), a relaxing fragrance, and a crafty marketing plan, and we’re all suckers.</p>
<p class="TXT">Maybe we think that because these products are used mostly on our surfaces—our skin, hair, nails—that they can’t do us much harm. They <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page37" title="37"/>feel good and smell nice, and they make pretty promises, and that’s about all we consider. We forget that our skin is a vital organ just like our lungs, our heart, or any other, and that it has an extremely important job: to protect our insides from all the bad stuff outside, the harmful microbes, pollution, and poisons and all the rest.</p>
<p class="TXT">Or maybe we just think we’re unacceptable unless we look, feel, and smell differently than we naturally do. A great many corporate fortunes have been built on exploiting human insecurity.</p>
<p class="TXT">The average American woman uses twelve personal care products every day, exposing herself to as many as 126 unique chemicals. Some of them have been linked to cancers of the breast and female reproductive organs. Others are endocrine-system disruptors, causing early-onset puberty in girls—which is itself an increased risk factor for certain cancers later in life. Men are no better off; we use nearly as many products containing the same gnarly substances, putting ourselves at similar risk. Keep in mind something that I will bring up repeatedly: These chemicals join all the other toxic substances we’re subjected to on a daily basis.</p>
<p class="TXT">Finally, there’s one more way personal care products damage our health. Pretty much everything I’ll discuss in this chapter is sold in a plastic container. When we finish our shampoo, bodywash, or sunscreen, out goes the bottle. But where exactly does it go? Recycling is kind of a scam—it makes us feel good to think every bit of plastic is being repurposed instead of ending up in a landfill somewhere. But it doesn’t always happen. Even recycling requires the use of fossil fuel as energy.</p>
<p class="TXT">According to the EPA, nearly 15 million tons of plastic containers and packaging are generated annually in the United States, and a lot of that is made to contain the products that keep us clean, pretty, and smelling sweet. Your empty bottles are adding to the global devastation caused by plastic overload, so the more personal care products you use, the more nonbiodegradable waste you are creating. Imagine the mountains of single-use plastic junk our beauty habits contribute to the environment. The cleaner we get, the filthier our world becomes.</p>
<p class="TXT">You can see why I think of this product category as “personal harm.”</p>
<p class="H1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page38" title="38"/>Fatal Convenience: Moisturizer</p>
<p class="TXF">Nature makes sure our skin stays moist, and for good reason: our epidermis is the first line of defense against all the nasty stuff—the bad bacteria, viruses, and fungi, the toxins, the irritants, the UV rays—that surrounds us every second of our lives and causes infection, inflammation, and worse.</p>
<p class="TXT">To keep it from becoming dry and cracked and easily breached, human skin has somewhere between 2,500 and 6,000 sebaceous glands per square inch. They produce sebum, which we think of as oil but is actually a waxy substance that lubricates the skin, retains its moisture, and helps maintain its integrity. After our teenage years, the body’s production of sebum goes into decline, at which point we may seek a little outside help.</p>
<p class="TXT">“Moisturizer” is kind of a misnomer: these products mainly keep our skin from losing the moisture that our bodies naturally provide. It’s also a catchall phrase, since there are various types of lotions and creams, and they do their job in slightly different ways. But the basis is the same: a mixture of water, a substance (often glycerin) that retains moisture, and other chemicals that combine to keep our skin intact.</p>
<p class="TXT">The big question in the personal care category is whether the substances we rub on our skin manage to penetrate to our insides. There are chemicals that absolutely <span class="ital">do</span> cross that barrier—think of transdermal patches used to transport medicines through the skin and into the bloodstream. If you think that moisturizers enter deeply into your skin, however, think again; we are not permeable when it comes to lotions and creams. After all, our skin’s main job is to keep things <span class="ital">out</span> of our bodies.</p>
<p class="TXT">There’s not a lot of independent research into the pros or cons of moisturizers, which doesn’t stop manufacturers from using all kinds of scientific-sounding brags to hype their products. You’ll sometimes see terms such as “hypoallergenic,” “all natural,” or even “noncomedogenic,” meaning the product won’t cause pimples, but these claims are pretty much meaningless, since there are no standards to guarantee them. There might also be a list of vitamins the lotion contains, but we have no way of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page39" title="39"/>knowing how much is there or whether they do anything to improve our skin. But it sure sounds healthy.</p>
<p class="TXT">The top two ingredients in most moisturizers, water and glycerin—which is technically a humectant, meaning it retains water—are harmless. But we can’t say the same about the long list of other substances listed on the label.</p>
<p class="TXT">For instance, there is research proving that parabens and phthalates, which mimic hormones, can enter the bloodstream. And these are frequently found in moisturizers. How can you tell? You have to look very, very closely for ingredients such as methylparaben, propylparaben, butylparaben, and ethylparaben, or for the phthalates most commonly used in personal care products, such as butyl benzyl phthalate, monobenzyl phthalate, dibutyl phthalate, mono-n-butyl phthalate, monoisobutyl phthalate, di-isodecyl phthalate, and diisononyl phthalate.</p>
<p class="TXT">They sound scary, don’t they? There is also polyacrylamide, which is added to moisturizers to bind the ingredients and is made from the chemical acrylamide, a possible carcinogen.</p>
<p class="TXT">Vitamin A (also listed as retinyl palmitate, retinyl acetate, retinoic acid, or retinol) is often added to moisturizer and promoted as an antiwrinkle agent. However, it might actually damage the skin: research shows that vitamin A can increase sun sensitivity and lead to burns. Sun exposure may also break down vitamin A to produce toxic free radicals that damage DNA.</p>
<p class="TXT">Lactic acid is also sometimes added to moisturizer to exfoliate your skin and make it glow. However, that power means it can be irritating and make your skin feel like it’s burning.</p>
<p class="TXT">And as we shall see elsewhere in this chapter, anything containing “fragrance” or “parfum” is suspect simply because those terms tell us nothing about what’s in them. Part of the pleasure of rubbing cream or lotion into our skin is the soothing scent that comes along for the ride. It’s a hard habit to break, I know.</p>
<p class="TXT">At some point in your life, you may have used perhaps the most effective skin barrier on the market: petroleum jelly, better known under <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page40" title="40"/>the trade name Vaseline. Slather that on your hide, and nothing will get in <span class="ital">or</span> out. Babies with diaper rash are routinely coated with it, and it does the trick, allowing their delicate skin to heal undisturbed.</p>
<p class="TXT">On the other hand—it’s made from crude oil!</p>
<p class="TXT">“Petroleum jelly” sounds like something you would use to lubricate heavy machinery. Covering our living, breathing skin with the same substance used to make gasoline and polyester pants doesn’t sound like the smartest idea, does it? In truth, there’s no research showing that petroleum jelly is harmful when applied to human skin. However, the process of refining petroleum into petrolatum can lead to its contamination with polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, or PAHs, which are classified as carcinogens.</p>
<p class="TXT">My advice is to avoid any moisturizer, lotion, or cream with ingredients that you don’t recognize. Think of how you choose your food, and take the same approach: feed your skin a healthy, all-natural diet.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Obviously, anything made with a crude oil−based product is polluting the planet, and we already burn enough fossil fuels. After petroleum jelly, lanolin is the best substance for holding in water, but it comes from sheep glands and must be extracted from their bodies—not a pain-free process—and for that reason alone should be shunned and stopped. And don’t forget all those plastic bottles you go through.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">First, use less soap when washing yourself. You’ll be doing your skin a favor, because you’re washing your natural sebum away. There’s a reason most soaps and bodywashes contain moisturizer: manufacturers know that their products are drying you out.</p>
<p class="TXT">Second, see what happens if you skip the moisturizer for a day or two. You might not even notice a difference, in which case maybe you can live without it permanently.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page41" title="41"/>Third, try drinking more water. Our skin becomes dry not only because we lack oils but because we don’t replace the water that escapes from the cells.</p>
<p class="TXT">If you still feel the need, try the simplest solutions first, such as natural oils. Organic coconut oil, which is safe and clean, will provide all you need to keep natural moisture in. It will do the job as well as anything you can buy in the drugstore—even better, because it’s cleaner (it’s also cheaper).</p>
<p class="TXT">If that solution seems a little too basic, try a product made with fair-trade shea butter, a natural emollient that has been used for thousands of years in Africa. Increased demand has created an environmental threat to shea trees, which take fifteen to twenty years to bear the nuts that produce the butter. It’s important to support fair trade practices, to ensure that both the environment and the people who cultivate the trees are treated ethically.</p>
<p class="TXT">There’s a terrific product called Waxelene Multi-Purpose Ointment (waxelene.com). Its cruelty-free ingredients include vitamin E oil, beeswax, organic rosemary oil, and organic soy oil. According to the brand, the beeswax is unbleached and raw, and it has anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, and antioxidant benefits.</p>
<p class="TXT">Rosemary oil improves blood circulation and with its antibacterial properties works as a natural preservative. Natural unrefined vitamin E oil also has antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties and helps protect skin. Another good brand is Goē Oil (jaobrand.com), made of twenty-eight plant, fruit, and flower oils. The good news is that there are many safe, healthy, sustainable skin moisturizers available, some of which are listed in <a href="../Text/CH010.xhtml"><span class="blue">chapter 10</span></a>.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Bodywash and Soap</p>
<p class="TXF">Soap literally keeps us alive.</p>
<p class="TXT">According to the CDC, nine out of ten foodborne illness outbreaks in the United States are caused by contamination due to food workers <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page42" title="42"/>not washing their hands. It’s not a rare occurrence and is definitely nothing to take lightly: every year, 48 million Americans get sick from their food, 128,000 are hospitalized, and 3,000 die. Around one-third of all diarrhea-related sicknesses and one-fifth of respiratory infections could be prevented by handwashing alone.</p>
<p class="TXT">None of that should be surprising—long before your parents told you to wash your hands before dinner, way back in 1400 BCE, Moses’s big brother Aaron made sure to scrub his before performing temple services. It makes sense: our skin is constantly being assaulted by filth, pollution, toxic chemicals, harmful germs, and unknown substances. Obviously, washing regularly is a no-brainer.</p>
<p class="TXT">But water alone isn’t enough to cleanse us. Soap makes the difference by mixing with the oil-like sebum on our skin to release the grit and grime we collect all day and rinse it away. Unfortunately, we’re not content to stop there; today we overuse soap and bodywash to the point where we are damaging both ourselves and our environment.</p>
<p class="TXT">Ask yourself: Just how disgusting do you get in the course of an average day? Do you wind up covered in mud or oil or drenched in sweat? Probably not, but most of us lather up daily from head to toe as though we require an extreme level of intensive cleansing. Either that or we think we’re in a soap commercial, where bubbles are always produced in crazy abundance.</p>
<p class="TXT">Our brains have been washed.</p>
<p class="TXT">One problem when we overdo the scrubbing is that we remove the lubricants our bodies produce to protect our skin and keep it supple and intact. Too much washing causes not just visible redness but also invisible cracks in the skin, which let in the very things we’re trying to keep out. One study of health care workers found that irritating the skin by overwashing affects the natural microbial flora of the hands, increasing the presence of dangerous bacteria that can cause methicillin-resistant <span class="ital">Staphylococcus aureus</span> (MRSA) infections.</p>
<p class="TXT">And while hand cleanliness is important, it’s questionable whether we need to lather up the rest of our bodies in their entirety every single <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page43" title="43"/>day. Some doctors suggest showering just a few times a week and using soap only on armpits, groin, and anywhere else that requires it (you’re an adult, you can figure this out on your own).</p>
<p class="TXT">Once, of course, the issue of personal cleanliness was less of an obsession than it is today. Before running hot and cold water and indoor plumbing, you can understand why our bathing habits might have been more relaxed. People made soap at home, using fats from either animals or vegetables mixed with an alkali, such as lye. It was an all-natural solution that—as we will see throughout this book—has since been replaced by commercial versions made with synthetic chemicals. And that’s where the problems start.</p>
<p class="TXT">Reading soap labels is a tricky endeavor because the ingredients have weird chemical names, even the ones that are plant based and benign. For example, Mrs. Meyer’s Clean Day products contain these scary-sounding yet naturally derived surfactants: sodium lauryl glucose carboxylate and sucrose laurate (derived from sugar); sodium laurylglucosides hydroxypropylsulfonate, and disodium 2-sulfolaurate (from coconuts); and sodium cocoamphoacetate (from plants). So rather than trying to decipher complicated ingredient lists, it might be easier to look instead for the ingredients to avoid.</p>
<p class="TXT">Check labels for:</p>
<p class="TXT"><span class="boldsc">PARABENS:</span> Methylparaben, propylparaben, butylparaben, and ethylparaben are all parabens. Their antimicrobial properties help protect against microorganisms, essentially acting as a preservative to lengthen the shelf life of the soap. But they’re not so good for us. Parabens are easily absorbed by our bodies and act as endocrine disruptors; a 2013 study found decreased fertility among women with parabens detected in their urine. Not only that, but research also found that butylparaben worked with other cell receptors to increase the growth of breast cancer cells.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span class="boldsc">PHTHALATES/FRAGRANCES:</span> A 2022 study of 5,303 adults found that exposure to phthalates was associated with cardiovascular-related and all-cause mortality. Previous research has linked the chemicals to increases <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page44" title="44"/>in premature births, gestational diabetes, obesity, breast and thyroid cancers, and infertility. Diethyl phthalate is used to make the scent in soaps last longer, but the FDA doesn’t require listing individual fragrance ingredients. The only way to avoid it is to steer clear of <span class="ital">any</span> product that lists fragrance as an ingredient, unless it’s marked phthalate free.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span class="boldsc">ANTIBACTERIALS:</span> A 2001 study found that 76 percent of liquid soaps contained the antibacterial agent triclosan or triclocarban. The problem is part of the much bigger issue of our overuse of antibiotics: at a certain point, they lose their effectiveness, meaning that they won’t work when we really need them. In 2013, the FDA banned the use of those two chemicals in soap. In response, manufacturers replaced them with different antibacterials, such as benzalkonium chloride, benzethonium chloride, and chloroxylenol, disturbing news since those chemicals have been an effective treatment option for drug-resistant staph infections. To top it off, there’s no evidence that they do a better job than plain soap and water. But people respond to the “antibacterial” promise, and soap sellers are happy to oblige.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span class="boldsc">SODIUM LAURETH SULFATE:</span> This is a common bodywash surfactant, not to be confused with sodium <span class="ital">lauryl</span> sulfate. The process of turning lauryl sulfate (which is known to be irritating to the skin) into laureth sulfate creates the cancer-causing chemical 1,4-dioxane as a by-product. However, the jury is not entirely out on sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS), a synthetic chemical usually derived from petroleum but that can also be derived from plants. According to research funded by the soap maker Seventh Generation, there is no scientific evidence that SLS is dangerous. And since it is biodegradable, it is unlikely to damage the environment. EWG seems to agree, giving the ingredient a low score of 1 to 2. I am not fully convinced.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">A study examining the environmental effect of increased use of soap during the pandemic found that high concentrations of detergents in fresh water “can cause massive foam to be created on water’s surface, leading to the reduced rate of oxygen penetration into water.” That’s bad <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page45" title="45"/>news for aquatic animal and plant life. Soap runoff can also make its way from water to land, where it damages soil and plants.</p>
<p class="TXT">Palm oil, a common ingredient in soap and other personal care products, is natural, but that’s the problem. Its harvesting has been linked to tropical deforestation, peat land draining and burning, declines in biodiversity, greenhouse gas emissions, and air pollution. And “sustainable” palm oil may be a fantasy. According to a 2018 study, so-called sustainable palm oil extraction still resulted in wildlife habitat degradation and forest loss.</p>
<p class="TXT">But as I said earlier, probably the worst effect of bodywash on the environment has zero to do with the soap itself—it’s the plastic bottles that it comes in.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">Soap clearly serves an important purpose, but we must use it sensibly. Too much won’t make you cleaner but could damage your skin and the environment. Get over the myth that you’ll be a social pariah unless you scrub yourself until you shine.</p>
<p class="TXT">Whenever practical, use bodywash instead of bar soap, for the emulsifiers that help lubricate your skin. Bodywash is basically the same thing as soap but usually contains emollients. Research shows that shea butter, soybean oil, and coconut oil help moisturize the skin and are gentler than harsh chemical products.</p>
<p class="TXT">Look for products made with simple ingredients, as few as possible, and sold in environmentally friendly packaging.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Toothpaste, Dental Floss, and Mouthwash</p>
<p class="TXF">Many millennia ago, anthropologists tell us, people used twigs, feathers, animal bones, homemade rinses, and other oddities to clean their mouths. That’s no surprise considering how important teeth and gums are to our overall health. For one thing, if you can’t eat, you can’t live. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page46" title="46"/>Also, our mouths are the wide-open portals to our insides, so we had better defend them against harmful bacteria and other hazards. And as we’ve seen elsewhere in this chapter, the main reason to keep our hands clean is so they don’t infect us through our mouths.</p>
<p class="TXT">So your mouth is not just an orifice in the middle of your face—it’s an environment, with its own ecology, and to ignore that fact is to ask for trouble.</p>
<p class="TXT">On the other hand, to address it incorrectly can be almost as bad. Let me ask you something: Are your teeth pearly white? Is your breath minty fresh? Are your gums perfectly pink and just the right size? It’s the insecurity stoked by the oral care industry that keeps the rest of us anxious about whether our mouths are a joy to behold or unsightly, foul-smelling sewers to be shunned.</p>
<p class="TXT">It all falls under the universal human fear of smelling bad from one body part or another. Entire fortunes have been built on such terrors.</p>
<p class="TXT">Let’s take a look.</p>
<p class="H2">Toothpaste</p>
<p class="TXF">Watch any toothpaste commercial. The stuff comes out of the tube creamy and white, maybe with colored stripes or even glitter, looking good enough to eat. It must take a lot of ingenuity (and industrial chemicals and processes) to make it look so delicious. But what does that have to do with oral health?</p>
<p class="TXT">Most toothpastes contain chemicals that have zero to do with cleaning our teeth and gums. For instance: saccharin is there to make it sweet; sodium lauryl sulfate creates the bubbly foam we take as proof of cleaning power; blue covarine tricks the eye by changing the way light reflects off our choppers, making them appear less yellow and more white; activated charcoal scrubs really well but can damage enamel and doesn’t make our teeth any whiter; triclosan is an antibacterial that actually increases our resistance to other antibiotics. The flavoring agents are there just to make <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page47" title="47"/>toothpaste tasty, but would you really neglect your oral hygiene if it didn’t remind you of dessert?</p>
<p class="TXT">Finally, FD&amp;C Blue 1 and Red 40 are used to dye toothpaste (mouthwash, too)—but they come with dangers. According to the Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI), Red 40 poses “risks including hyperactivity and other behavior problems in children.” In Europe, products containing these dyes must carry a warning label; one study found Red 40 that was contaminated with the carcinogen benzidine, a chemical used in the dye’s production. CSPI also warned that Blue No. 1 has the potential to cause neurotoxicity and cautions against its use by children (although it can be found in children’s toothpaste).</p>
<p class="TXT">And then, in addition to all that stuff, there’s fluoride—a chemical with a past.</p>
<p class="TXT">Early in the twentieth century, scientists discovered that areas with high levels of naturally occurring fluoride in their drinking water also had low levels of tooth decay. In 1945, Grand Rapids, Michigan, became the first city in the world to add the chemical to its tap water. Children there began having fewer cavities, and soon the practice spread throughout the country—to the point where the CDC praised fluoridation as one of the “ten great public health achievements” of the twentieth century. Effortlessly, American children would enjoy great dental health for the rest of their lives.</p>
<p class="TXT">Even back then, however, experts worried about possible harmful effects of drinking so much fluoride. But those concerns were dismissed—for a while. Because once fluoride’s benefits for tooth health became known, toothpaste manufacturers started including it in their products, meaning that kids and everyone else got even more of the chemical. Then researchers looking into fluoride’s side effects began reporting some alarming results.</p>
<p class="TXT">The main danger of fluoride has to do with its toxic effects on developing brains. According to a 2012 report from the Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, “Children in high-fluoride areas had significantly lower IQ scores than those who lived in low-fluoride areas.” <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page48" title="48"/>And the National Research Council (NRC) of the National Academy of Sciences has raised concerns about links between fluoride and bone cancer, bone fractures, and reproductive system problems.</p>
<p class="TXT">Clearly, fluoride’s reputation has taken a beating since local governments began adding it to everyone’s tap water. Take a look at what the FDA now requires toothpaste manufacturers to include on the label for products containing fluoride:</p>
<p class="EXT">WARNING: Keep out of reach of children under 6 years of age. If more than used for brushing is accidentally swallowed, get medical help or contact a Poison Control Center right away.</p>
<p class="TXT">As a result of that warning, there are now more than twenty thousand reports each year to poison control centers in the United States due to excessive ingestion of fluoride toothpaste.</p>
<p class="TXT">It’s important to keep in mind that the problems with fluoride stem from drinking it—not brushing your teeth with products containing it. It remains true that using a fluoride toothpaste benefits children’s teeth (adults’ teeth, not so much).</p>
<p class="TXT">It’s possible to give your kids beautiful, healthy, cavity-free smiles without subtracting from their IQs. Just be sure to tell them: Don’t swallow! And maybe if you stick with brands that don’t taste as minty and sweet as candy, they won’t.</p>
<p class="H2">Dental Floss</p>
<p class="TXF">We have to thank Levi Parmly (1790–1859), widely recognized as the father of dental hygiene, for most of the oral health practices we follow today, especially flossing. He recognized that cavities were caused by food that got stuck between the teeth that brushing couldn’t remove. So in 1815, he began promoting the use of waxed silk thread as “the most important” tool to prevent tooth decay. According to Mary Duenwald in the <span class="ital">New York Times</span>:</p>
<p class="EXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page49" title="49"/>[Parmly] was not above proselytizing on the street. “If he noticed that someone’s mouth was not in a good state of repair, he would buttonhole him,” said Dr. Arden G. Christen, who teaches dental history at Indiana University. Parmly would hand out floss and teach people how to use it.</p>
<p class="TXT">That must have been quite a sight!</p>
<p class="TXT">Like brushing, flossing is necessary if we want to have a healthy mouth. But manufacturers have added unnecessary, potentially harmful ingredients, so we need to be cautious.</p>
<p class="TXT">Old-school floss, for all its benefits, had a downside—all that sawing back and forth between the teeth hurts and makes our gums bleed. An early fix was to coat it in wax, causing it to move more easily. Then, because corporate innovation never rests, somebody came up with floss that is wide and flat like a ribbon instead of thin and round like string. On top of that, a Teflon-like chemical was used to coat the floss to allow it to slide through the spaces between teeth without any friction at all.</p>
<p class="TXT">It was a genius move, except for one little detail: the coating was made from the PFAS family of “forever chemicals,” which pop up time and again in the world of Fatal Conveniences. These are the substances that almost all of us have ingested one way or another and have been linked to cancer, liver damage, cognitive developmental issues, and a long list of other serious health problems.</p>
<p class="TXT">Are there PFASs in your brand of floss? It’s hard to say, because floss is considered a medical device and so there are no labeling requirements. But a study of women who used one popular brand of friction-free floss found PFAS chemicals in their blood. Scary.</p>
<p class="TXT">In addition to floss being slippery, it’s also now flavored, usually with mint, the universal symbol of wonderful breath. What exactly is in that flavoring? That’s a good question, but we’ll never know, for the same reason we don’t know anything else about floss: it’s considered to be a medical device and thus is exempt from the FDA’s labeling rules.</p>
<p class="TXT">Does all this mean that flossing your teeth can cause cancer? Who <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page50" title="50"/>knows? Once a day you’re putting a chemical linked to cancer and other diseases into contact with your delicate mouth tissues. Doesn’t sound like the smartest thing in the world, does it?</p>
<p class="TXT">As I’ve said, there are way too many hazardous and carcinogenic chemicals already inside our bodies, due just to living on this planet at this moment in time. Why add to the toxic load if we don’t have to? To me, that’s a good reason to stick with old-school, mildly painful floss that does more good than harm.</p>
<p class="H2">Mouthwash</p>
<p class="TXF">Finally, we come to the iffiest oral hygiene product: mouthwash.</p>
<p class="TXT">There are references to mouth rinsing in Chinese medicine circa 2700 BCE and in the ancient Greek and Roman periods, too. The rinses typically contained salt, alum, vinegar, and maybe some anise. Later versions used wine or beer.</p>
<p class="TXT">But mouthwash as we know it was developed in the late 1800s, and it usually contained alcohol. In 1879, a product you may have heard of—Listerine—was introduced as an antiseptic for use in surgery and for sterilizing wounds. By 1914, however, it had been repurposed as a mouthwash due to its effectiveness at killing germs.</p>
<p class="TXT">In 1920, the makers of Listerine came up with a game changer: they took an obscure, minor medical condition, halitosis, and used their marketing muscle to turn it into a twentieth-century anxiety. Suddenly, what had been a mere social liability (and probably an extremely common one) became a treatable ailment, and sales of the medicinal-tasting stuff took off.</p>
<p class="TXT">Which is not to say that bad breath doesn’t exist, because it sure does, as we’re all painfully aware. There are many possible causes, including:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Bacteria buildup on the teeth (in which case you need to brush and floss more)</li>
<li>Gum disease</li>
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page51" title="51"/>Improperly cleaned dentures</li>
<li>Infections of the nose, windpipe, or lungs</li>
<li>A condition called xerostomia, or dry mouth. Because of low saliva production, the mouth can’t cleanse itself by carrying away leftover bits of food and other debris. It may also be caused by certain medicines, a salivary gland disorder, or breathing through the mouth instead of the nose.</li>
<li>Chronic bronchitis</li>
<li>Postnasal drip</li>
<li>Chronic sinusitis</li>
<li>Diabetes</li>
<li>Disorders of the liver, kidneys, or gastrointestinal system</li>
</ul>

<p class="TXT">Or you might just have eaten garlic or onions, smoked cigarettes, or ingested other things that will make your breath stink no matter how many oral care products you use.</p>
<p class="TXT">Mouthwash is overrated and exists mainly to treat insecurity, not halitosis. There’s actually a psychological condition called <span class="ital">halitophobia</span>, the unfounded fear that you have bad breath. Unless you have lousy oral hygiene or a treatable medical problem, your breath probably smells no worse than anyone else’s.</p>
<p class="TXT">In fact, there’s research showing that mouthwash could actually be causing health problems. One study found that using it twice a day was associated with an increased risk of prediabetes or diabetes, while rinsing less than twice a day had no such effect. Why might this be so? Researchers speculate it’s because the antibacterials in mouthwash kill off the good microbes with the bad—and the lack of “good” actinobacteria is thought to raise nitrate levels in the blood and increase the risk of developing type 2 diabetes.</p>
<p class="TXT">Another study found that mouthwash containing chlorhexidine, when used twice a day for a week, increased the amount of certain bacteria and created an environment that’s favorable for cavities (and is also possibly detrimental to cardiovascular health). Also, although chlorhexidine is <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page52" title="52"/>used in mouthwash to control plaque and gingivitis, researchers in Italy found that it can stain teeth and tongue. That’s not exactly what we’re going for when we obsess over our oral grooming.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">There are lots of ways to minimize the downside of modern oral hygiene practices. First, consume mainly whole plants, fruits, nuts, seeds, legumes, and natural herbs and spices. These all have a natural cleansing effect rather than fouling your mouth and body with ultraprocessed garbage. You can chew on rosemary, spearmint, or peppermint leaves for that fresh, minty taste. Frankincense, myrrh, and white oak bark all have antiseptic and anti-inflammatory properties, and chewing them is a great way to support healthy gums and rebuild enamel. Finally, drinking a glass of water with lemon juice in the morning knocks out overnight bacteria.</p>
<p class="TXT">Here’s another good idea: don’t pay attention to social media ads or TV commercials. The actors in them squeeze enough toothpaste onto one brush for an entire family. The reason this is done is obvious: if you do the same, you’ll go through a tube about twice as fast as necessary.</p>
<p class="TXT">If the idea of consuming fluoride makes you uncomfortable, there are nontoxic alternatives, including plant extracts such as pomegranate, garlic, and ginger. Some popular natural toothpaste makers use xylitol, green tea extract, papaya plant extract, and baking soda. If you’ve been eating something odiferous, sucking sugar-free mints or chewing gum might do the trick. And if you’re sick and tired of flossing, try a rechargeable electric flosser, which shoots a stream of water between your teeth to dislodge anything that might be stuck there.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Convenience: Fragrance</p>
<p class="TXF">What’s so bad about smelling good?</p>
<p class="TXT">It’s no mystery why the world of consumer products is obsessed with fragrances. To a huge degree, our behaviors are driven by our olfactory <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page53" title="53"/>sense, whether we’re talking about food, flowers, new car interiors, or bubble bath—or other people. Our emotions are powerfully triggered by scent, and we’re pretty much helpless to resist the lure.</p>
<p class="TXT">This is why manufacturers add fragrance to just about everything you buy. It’s ubiquitous in the personal care category, though it’s also present everywhere else—you didn’t believe corn chips or T-shirts smell that way naturally, did you? Clearly, we need to be on the lookout, but what exactly are we looking for? As I’ve already said, it’s impossible to know which substances are used to make products smell good. On the label, all you’re likely to see is “fragrance” or “parfum,” and you can guess why manufacturers obscure an iffy ingredient.</p>
<p class="TXT">The chemical groups found most often in fragrances are benzenoids, terpenes, and musks. All of these are found in nature, which doesn’t necessarily mean they’re nontoxic. At any rate, the ones used in fragrance are all made using industrial processes. Even musk, which was originally sourced from a gland found next to a musk deer’s penis, is now mostly man-made (because it’s cheaper, not out of any regard for the musk deer’s feelings).</p>
<p class="TXT">Whether natural or synthesized, commercial scents are irritating to many people, who experience allergic reactions whether they are worn by others or themselves. A 2020 study found that up to 4.5 percent of people may be allergic to fragrance chemicals used most often in deodorants, perfumes, and aftershaves. Another study found that over one-third of Americans suffer adverse health effects, such as respiratory difficulties and migraine headaches, from exposure to fragranced products. That’s because even “natural” chemicals emit gases known as volatile organic compounds, or VOCs. No wonder people who overdo it with cologne are shunned as walking irritants.</p>
<p class="TXT">But allergic reactions are the least of our worries.</p>
<p class="TXT">Throughout this book we’ve seen warnings about the chemicals known as phthalates. They’re added to fragrance products to make the scent last longer. According to the FDA, a common one, diethylphthalate, or DEP, “does not pose known risks for human health as it is currently <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page54" title="54"/>used in cosmetics and fragrances.” But a 2022 study found that exposure to this chemical and other phthalates is associated with cardiovascular and all-cause mortality. Previous research had linked the chemicals to increases in premature births, gestational diabetes, obesity, breast and thyroid cancers, and infertility. They are also “among the most abundant endocrine disrupting compounds found in indoor air and dust,” according to researchers from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, who added that exposure to phthalates can affect bone mineral density and sperm function.</p>
<p class="TXT">Aldehydes are found naturally in plants and are used as fragrance enhancers—they’re what give Chanel No. 5 its legendary scent. One type of aldehyde, acetaldehyde, is found in ripe fruit and is used to add a fruity fragrance. But the International Agency for Research on Cancer considers it a carcinogen, and it’s included on California’s Proposition 65 list of cancer warnings. Can we know for sure that it’s in the fragrances we wear? No, but a study from the 1980s found that exposure to sunlight affects the compounds in perfume bottles, turning ethanol into acetaldehyde.</p>
<p class="TXT">Fragrance ingredients carry the same danger of hormone disruption as in other personal care product chemicals. A German study published in 2002 found that women with premenstrual symptoms and infertility had higher levels of artificial musk in their blood samples than women who had been pregnant already and didn’t have premenstrual syndrome. Researchers from the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in New York City have warned that “health concerns associated with exposures to synthetic musks include primarily endocrine disruption.”</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">There are data indicating that synthetic musk fragrance compounds are found in high concentrations in fresh water and the fish that live there, suggesting that these chemicals persist long after they go down the drain. A study in China found that synthetic musks were found in high concentrations in the muscle tissues of fish and shrimp in a lake, and they’ve <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page55" title="55"/>been found in Lake Michigan as well. Additional research from Stanford University’s Hopkins Marine Station found that musks “inhibited natural defenses against toxicants in California mussels, and that the effect remained long after exposure.”</p>
<p class="TXT">Finally, a 2021 study found that emissions from fragranced personal care and cleaning products account for at least <span class="ital">half</span> of the ozone attributed to volatile chemical products in Manhattan! The environment’s going to hell, but gee, don’t we smell great?</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">Here’s the best advice I can offer: don’t use any product that lists “fragrance” or “parfum” on the ingredients label. If the manufacturer doesn’t tell you exactly what’s in the product, it must have a reason, and it’s probably not a good one. Even better, try to avoid products that contain fragrance; look for those labeled “fragrance free.” Believe me, as long as you and your clothes are clean, you already smell good enough. You don’t need some industrial lab concoction to make you more lovable than you already are. If wearing fragrance is important to you, try using one of the many essential oils or other all-natural substances that people perfumed themselves with for centuries before big business took over. Beyond that:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Look for labels saying that products are phthalate free.</li>
<li>Insist on ingredient transparency. Even though they’re not required to list fragrance ingredients, some companies now volunteer this information. L’Oréal announced in 2021 that it will be disclosing ingredients on its products and on its website. Unilever now reveals its products’ ingredients as well. Procter &amp; Gamble is disclosing fragrance components online via SmartLabel (smartlabel.org) and its website. It even includes a list of ingredients it <span class="ital">doesn’t</span> use. Johnson &amp; Johnson has committed to fragrance transparency, but as of this writing, only for baby products. Tom’s of Maine backs up its claims of using only naturally sourced or derived materials for its products <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page56" title="56"/>by listing ingredients to the 100 parts per million in its fragrance ingredients disclosure info.</li>
<li>Check for the EPA Safer Choice label. It means a company is committed to using fragrances without “listed carcinogens, mutagens, or reproductive/developmental toxicants (CMRs); listed persistent, bioaccumulative, and toxic compounds (PBTs); and listed respiratory sensitizers.” You can search for certified products on the agency’s website (epa.gov).</li>
</ul>
<p class="H1">Fatal Convenience: Sunscreen</p>
<p class="TXF">There’s something weird about the fact that although the sun is the source of all life on our planet, we’ve been taught to fear it. Without the light and heat of that big star 93 million miles away, we wouldn’t exist, and neither would plants or anything else we eat.</p>
<p class="TXT">Among all the other wonderful things sunlight gives us is the amazing ability to create, within our bodies, vitamin D, which keeps us alive and healthy by regulating at least a thousand different genes, including those involved in immune system function. It even protects us from cancer.</p>
<p class="TXT">Vitamin D production isn’t the only blessing that comes with exposure to sunlight. We evolved to be outdoors when the sun shines and asleep when it’s dark. That’s why our pineal glands synthesize melatonin at night, to help us sleep soundly. There’s research showing that catching rays turns on beneficial neural pathways, and even artificial light in the morning promotes better sleep the next night and is effective against PMS and seasonal affective disorder, or SAD, the depression some people experience during the gray and gloomy months of the year.</p>
<p class="TXT">Why are we so afraid of the sun? Number one, because we’ve been told over and over about the risk of skin cancer from exposure to the sun’s ultraviolet rays, a legitimate worry. There’s also a cosmetic reason: the idea that our skin will age more quickly and wrinkle if we get too much direct sunlight. It’s hard to tell which of those two we fear most, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page57" title="57"/>but we’ve been indoctrinated with the fairly recent idea that we need to hide from the sun.</p>
<p class="TXT">Which is how sunscreen came to be practically a requirement today—even though these creams and lotions come with their own health hazards, which may be more dangerous than what we’re using them to protect us from.</p>
<p class="TXT">The American Academy of Dermatology says we should wear sunscreen every time we step outdoors, even on the cloudiest winter days. It also says, “Claims that any of these ingredients are toxic or a hazard to human health have not been proven.”</p>
<p class="TXT">That isn’t exactly true.</p>
<p class="TXT">In fact, according to the FDA, of all the active ingredients found in sunscreens, only two are “generally recognized as safe and effective”: zinc oxide and titanium dioxide, both natural substances.</p>
<p class="TXT">There’s a much longer roster of chemicals still in use that the FDA decided <span class="ital">not</span> to put on its “safe and effective” list. You may already be aware of one of them—by now many people avoid using sunscreen containing para-aminobenzoic acid, or PABA. Also on the FDA list: trolamine salicylate, cinoxate, dioxybenzone, ensulizole, homosalate, meradimate, octinoxate, octisalate, octocrylene, padimate O, sulisobenzone, oxybenzone, and avobenzone. The FDA usually lags behind the rest of the scientific world in recognizing industrial chemicals as being health hazards, so when it worries a little about a substance, we should worry a lot.</p>
<p class="TXT">The European Commission says that some of the chemicals on that list are unsafe in the amounts currently used in sunscreen and has recommended drastic cuts in the levels allowed. Meanwhile, US manufacturers are legally permitted to use those chemicals at even higher levels—far exceeding what Europe will tolerate for its citizens. For example, after a single application of sunscreen, subjects’ blood concentrations of oxybenzone were more than 180 times the FDA’s level of concern. They soared to <span class="ital">more than five hundred times</span> the FDA’s own threshold after four days’ use as recommended on the label!</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page58" title="58"/>According to studies published by the FDA, six of the chemicals used in sunscreen are absorbed into the body after just one use and can still be detected on the skin and in the blood weeks after being applied. All the chemicals on that list are suspected or proven endocrine disruptors. High levels of oxybenzone found in the blood of adolescent boys resulted in significantly lower testosterone levels. The chemical has also been associated with shorter pregnancies, lower birth weights, and increased risk of developing breast cancer and endometriosis. It’s also possible that because it is an anti-inflammatory, it might actually hide the symptoms of sunburn and keep it from being treated.</p>
<p class="TXT">There’s even the potential for danger from a known carcinogen that is <span class="ital">not</span> listed among sunscreen ingredients. Research conducted by an independent lab found benzene in 27 percent of the sunscreen samples they tested, including the most popular brands. A 2021 study found yet another dangerous chemical that isn’t on the ingredients list: octocrylene. When this degrades, it can turn into benzophenone, also an endocrine disruptor and carcinogen.</p>
<p class="TXT">The fact is that most of us are flying blind when it comes to sunscreen. We assume that choosing the highest SPF we can find is the way to go, but that’s no guarantee of safety or anything else. The EWG found that 85 percent of sunscreen products with an SPF rating of 15 or higher provide inadequate protection from UV rays or have ingredients that either are known health hazards or have not been tested for safety. Nearly every sunscreen from leading brands failed to meet EWG’s standards for safety and effectiveness. Some studies suggest that sunscreen with SPF 30 or higher reduces vitamin D production in the body by a whopping 95 to 98 percent—kind of counterproductive, considering that vitamin D helps protect us from cancer. You are being told to protect yourself from overexposure to the sun and cancer by using sunscreen when some of its ingredients can potentially cause cancer or drastically reduce your body’s ability to protect against it!</p>
<p class="TXT">Does that make sense?</p>
<p class="H2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page59" title="59"/>How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Two of the chemicals found in sunscreen, oxybenzone and octinoxate, have been banned by the state of Hawaii and the city of Key West, Florida, because they threaten the health of the marine ecosystem. Knowing that, ask yourself: Do they belong on your skin and in your bloodstream?</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">The first thing we should do is make sure we’re soaking up enough direct sunlight for our health. Vitamin D researchers recommend half an hour of exposure between 10:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. at least twice a week to the face, arms, legs, or back—<span class="ital">without</span> sunscreen. Make sure to factor in your existing tan. The lighter you are, the less time you need in the sun.</p>
<p class="TXT">If you’re worried about getting too much sun on your face, wear a nontoxic sunscreen (and maybe a hat). But weather permitting, make sure your arms and legs are bare, so you absorb enough UV to guarantee your supply of vitamin D. If for some reason you can’t get out in the sun—or if you live where there’s not much sunlight during winter months—the moderate use of commercial tanning beds that emit 2 to 6 percent UVB radiation is considered a safe and effective way to supplement vitamin D.</p>
<p class="TXT">We should also recognize that we don’t need <span class="ital">any</span> lotion to protect us from the sun; we can just cover up or go inside during the hottest part of the day. Even the World Health Organization advises us to first try limiting our exposure to direct sunlight <span class="ital">before</span> automatically applying sunscreen. On most weather apps you can check the UV index and plan your outdoor time accordingly. Finally, eating foods high in antioxidants will protect your skin, along with the rest of your body, from the effects of too much sun exposure.</p>
<p class="TXT">What <span class="ital">is</span> important is to avoid getting sunburned, since bad burns are believed to be the cause of skin cancers later in life.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page60" title="60"/>We need to keep in mind that although skin cancer is the most common form of the disease, melanoma, the kind that kills, was responsible for just 1.2 percent of all cancer deaths in 2021. Despite what the American Academy of Dermatology tells us, there’s no one-size-fits-all advice when it comes to sunlight exposure and cancer. Your skin color, for instance, is a factor: lighter-skinned people need to be more careful about spending too much time in direct sunlight. Statistically, the lifetime risk of developing melanoma is 2.6 percent (1 in 38) for whites, 0.6 percent (1 in 167) for Hispanics, and 0.1 percent (1 in 1,000) for Blacks.</p>
<p class="TXT">One special category is children, for the simple reason that adult melanoma is believed to be a result of bad sunburns that occur in childhood. It takes that long for the cancer to develop. So one way or another, they need to be protected through common sense, though it’s best to do so by limiting their exposure to sunlight rather than coating them in sketchy chemicals.</p>
<p class="TXT">As I already said, when it’s absolutely necessary, go with sunscreens containing zinc oxide or titanium dioxide. Unlike all the other kinds, which contain a chemical filter, these two create a physical barrier that absorbs sunlight before it reaches your skin. That’s why they’re thicker and harder to apply, which is a little inconvenient, I agree. But they’re a lot safer in the long run.</p>
<p class="TXT">Finally, stick with sunscreen lotions—the spray-on kind doesn’t protect us adequately from the sun’s rays.</p>
<p class="TXT">In the end, there’s a proper balance we need to strike, Goldilocks style, between getting enough sunlight to produce vitamin D and getting too much and risking skin cancer. It’s possible to find that sweet spot if we try.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Tampons</p>
<p class="TXF">When you consider all the substances women have used to absorb menstrual blood—grass, wool, paper, sponge—it’s easy to see why tampons were a godsend. The fact that they could be inserted into the body, rather <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page61" title="61"/>than worn on the outside like cumbersome pads, makes them really appealing. Today, an estimated 70 percent of American women who menstruate use tampons, meaning that by now they are no longer mere conveniences—they’re necessities.</p>
<p class="TXT">The fact that they’re regulated by the FDA as medical devices should be reassuring. But as we’ve seen elsewhere, a federal agency’s oversight doesn’t always mean we’re being protected. Tampons and other menstrual products, including pads, can contain phthalates due to the fragrances that some brands add. They might also include parabens, bisphenol A, and triclocarban, endocrine disruptors that can cause:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Endometriosis</li>
<li>Ovulation disorders</li>
<li>Hormonal disorders</li>
<li>Allergic reactions</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">Tampons may contain dioxins, the chemical by-product of converting wood pulp into rayon, the absorbent fabric that is often used. The EPA says that high levels of dioxins put us at risk of developing:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Immune system damage</li>
<li>Increased risk of pelvic inflammatory disease</li>
<li>Reduced fertility</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">According to the FDA, dioxin exposure from tampons “is many times less than normally present in the body from other environmental sources.” That might be so, but it’s still concerning for two reasons: the mucous membranes lining the vagina are permeable and connect to the ovaries and uterus; and dioxins may cause cancer. The fact that we’re taking in even more dioxins from other sources in the environment isn’t reassuring—just the opposite. Because vaginal skin is so thin, researchers also estimate that endocrine-disrupting chemicals from menstrual products are absorbed at a rate ten times as high as elsewhere on the body.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page62" title="62"/>In addition to the dangers from their chemical contents, tampons pose another threat, which made headlines back in the 1980s: reports of women getting sick and even dying from toxic shock syndrome, or TSS, a multisystem infection caused by leaving tampons in for too long. That was the result of yet another “convenience”; a new innovation, “maximum absorbency tampons,” was leading users to replace them less frequently. The synthetic contents that caused toxic shock are no longer used. But the risk of infection from tampons will always remain.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Globally, an estimated 7 billion tampons are used every year. Like diapers, they’re made with absorbent synthetic materials that don’t decompose in a hurry. Over the forty or so years during which the average woman menstruates, the estimated sixteen thousand tampons (and applicators) she uses will end up in landfills or even in our waterways. Throw in another four hundred pounds of packaging on top of that.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">Look for brands that are unbleached, fragrance free, and made without dyes or hydrogen peroxide (used for whitening).</p>
<p class="TXT">Use brands made with organic cotton.</p>
<p class="TXT">Use tampons without plastic applicators.</p>
<p class="TXT">Change tampons every four hours to prevent toxic shock syndrome.</p>
<p class="TXT">Try menstrual products from companies committed to using healthy, all-natural ingredients, like organic cotton.</p>
<p class="TXT">Consider giving up tampons altogether! One alternative is the menstrual cup, from brands such as Nixit, DivaCup, and Cora. Hesitant to make the switch? A study done in Vancouver found that 91 percent of tampon users said they’d switch after trying a cup. You want medical-grade silicone, BPA free, of course.</p>
<p class="TXT">Another choice is reusable pads, from companies including Hannah, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page63" title="63"/>Tree Hugger, and New Moon, or period underwear from Thinx, Knix, or TomboyX.</p>
<p class="TXT">Finally, there is a movement to force manufacturers to list all ingredients used in tampons. Find a petition online and sign it!</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Convenience: Lipstick</p>
<p class="TXF">There are two factors peculiar to lipstick and lip gloss that should make wearers worry. Number one is that the skin on our lips is much thinner than that pretty much anywhere else on our bodies. That thinness means we absorb whatever we put onto our lips. Number two is that lipstick wearers can’t help swallowing some of it. They have it on from morning until bedtime and apply it several times during a normal day. You’re constantly wetting your lips with your tongue—we all do. And every time, a little bit of lipstick stays on your tongue, slides down your throat, and enters your stomach, where it is absorbed into your tissues just like anything else you eat or drink. Not a lot, but some.</p>
<p class="TXT">There’s a third thing, too: lead. There are also other dangerous metals, including chromium, cadmium, aluminum, and manganese, all of which are contained in the pigment. Lead, as you probably know, is a neurotoxin. It builds up in the body and damages the brain. It’s why when children are exposed to lead in paint or drinking water, the results are so devastating. They suffer from learning, language, and behavioral disorders. Exposure to lead has also been linked to other health concerns, among them:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Reduced fertility in both men and women</li>
<li>Hormonal changes and menstrual irregularities</li>
<li>Delayed onset of puberty</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">In 2007, the Campaign for Safe Cosmetics released a report titled <span class="ital">A Poison Kiss</span>, for which an independent laboratory tested thirty-three popular brands of lipsticks for lead content. It found that 61 percent of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page64" title="64"/>lipsticks, including those made by the biggest names in the business, tested positive for the metal. The FDA and cosmetics companies insist that the metals in lipsticks occur at such low levels that they pose no harm. But according to the CDC, there is <span class="ital">no such thing</span> as a safe level of lead—for anyone. In addition, according to a CDC fact sheet, “Pregnant women and women of childbearing age should avoid exposure to lead because lead ingested by a mother can affect the unborn child.”</p>
<p class="TXT">We all ought to be extra careful about what we wear on our lips. And lipstick makers should be extra cautious, knowing that their customers will be not only wearing their product but eating it.</p>
<p class="TXT">Heavy metals aren’t the only dangerous thing about lipstick. It also contains a category of industrial chemicals called D4 and D5, which we find everywhere in cosmetics and personal care products. They are bioaccumulative, meaning that they build up in our bodies and also in the environment once we wash the makeup off and it goes down the drain and into the waterways. The Canadian government has declared these chemicals toxic, and the European Union placed them on its restricted substances list because they are endocrine disruptors.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">Do you want to be 100 percent sure you aren’t exposing your lips, mouth, and body to the harmful ingredients in lipstick? Don’t wear it! I know, I know that’s probably not realistic. But maybe you can wear less. Or use a brand made with nontoxic ingredients. Here’s a list of some of the natural substances that health-conscious companies put into safe lip products:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Elderberry extract</li>
<li>Moringa oil</li>
<li>Organic avocado oil</li>
<li>Organic plum seed oil</li>
<li>Organic hemp seed oil</li>
<li>Organic neem oil</li>
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page65" title="65"/>Organic orange oil</li>
<li>Sunflower seed wax</li>
<li>Soy butter</li>
<li>Kokum butter</li>
<li>Candelilla wax</li>
<li>Beet powder</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">They sound a lot safer than the industrial chemicals found in conventional cosmetics, don’t they?</p>
<p class="TXT">Here are some companies to try for safer lip products.</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Axiology, which proclaims that none of its cosmetics contains more than ten ingredients, and they’re vegan and cruelty free with no palm oil</li>
<li>Hourglass, a great vegan brand</li>
<li>Lush, vegan lipstick containing broccoli seeds!</li>
<li>Kuwaloo, a small, eco-friendly UK-based brand making handmade mineral lip and cheek balm</li>
<li>Inika, the world’s first certified organic vegan range of lipsticks</li>
<li>E.L.F., Smashbox, and Kylie Cosmetics, vegan brands</li>
<li>Honest Beauty</li>
<li>Boomstick Glo</li>
</ul>
<p class="H1">Fatal Convenience: Shaving Cream</p>
<p class="TXF">On the face of it—no pun intended, honest—shaving should be simple. There’s your skin, your blade, and a substance to go between the two to protect you from cuts and irritations and make the process work smoothly. Whatever product you use is in place for a few moments only. No sooner do you put it on than you remove it.</p>
<p class="TXT">We’re not content to keep things so basic, of course. Way back in the 1970s, Joe Namath and Farrah Fawcett made shaving cream sexy, at least if you believed their TV commercial. There was also the one where <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page66" title="66"/>the gorgeous Swedish model cooed, “Take it off . . . take it all off.” (She was referring to shaving cream, wasn’t she?) Suddenly, the boring daily task of removing stubble became a whole lot more interesting than when our prehistoric ancestors scraped their cheeks with flint, clam shells, or pieces of bronze.</p>
<p class="TXT">For the most part, the active ingredients in shaving products aren’t toxic: nearly 80 percent water, plus something to remove your skin’s natural lubricant so the whiskers are easier to cut, plus something else to moisturize and soothe the skin. But those aren’t the only substances present.</p>
<p class="TXT">As I’ve mentioned before, the “forever chemicals” known as PFASs, PFOAs, and PFC are found in thousands of products we use every day. Their main job is to make things slippery, as in Teflon nonstick cooking surfaces, but they are also present in shaving cream. They make your skin sleek and smooth, which sounds like a nice idea until you remember that these chemicals have been linked to several kinds of cancer (including testicular), thyroid problems, high cholesterol levels, colitis, and more.</p>
<p class="TXT">They have also been linked to developmental and hormonal dysfunction in children and abnormal fetal development in pregnant women (including a possible higher incidence of infant death). As if all that weren’t bad enough, the chemicals are persistent, meaning that they accumulate in both our bodies and the environment. These substances are dangerous—definitely not the kind of thing you want to slap onto your face every morning or use to shave your legs. You’re already being exposed to these chemicals in so many ways, why add one more?</p>
<p class="TXT">Triethanolamine is another common ingredient, used to soften skin and adjust the pH of shaving cream. It’s not classified as cancer causing, but the National Cancer Institute has studied it due to concerns that it can turn into the carcinogen N-nitrosodiethanolamine. Polyethylene glycol (PEG), a chemical that acts as a thickener and emulsifier, is found in many personal care products, including shaving cream. It’s not hazardous—except for the fact that contaminants frequently found in PEG, 1,4-dioxane and ethylene oxide, which are part of the manufacturing process and often present as impurities, are <span class="ital">both</span> carcinogenic. This is <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page67" title="67"/>a good reminder that not every ingredient in any product, even food, is listed on the label. Sometimes the offending substances are in the product unintentionally and anonymously—which doesn’t make them any less lethal.</p>
<p class="TXT">A big part of shaving cream’s appeal is the way it smells: clean and soapy. But the manufacturers won’t tell us exactly which chemicals they use to create those scents, so we’re better off skipping anything with the word <span class="ital">fragrance</span> or <span class="ital">parfum</span> on the label.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Shaving cream’s harm to the environment comes not so much from the product itself but from the delivery method. First, there’s the metal can. According to the EPA, in one year around 3.75 billion aerosol cans (of all products, not just shaving cream) are filled in the United States alone. That in itself is a huge environmental burden, in both the making and the disposing—especially for a product that doesn’t really need such a heavy-duty container. The other hazard is the propellant. Until the 1970s, ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) were the main propellant used in aerosol cans. Today manufacturers use hydrocarbons or compressed gas, which is an improvement, but these still give off volatile organic compounds, which damage the environment and aren’t so great for us, either.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">You could just give up shaving cream altogether, because it’s unnecessary. Instead, apply whatever bodywash or soap you use on the rest of your skin, preferably one without harmful chemicals. Women have the right idea: they lather up and shave in the shower. That’s a little difficult for a man to do, unless you have a nonfogging mirror in there. But it’s possible.</p>
<p class="TXT">Or do what I do: use a little organic coconut oil, which will lubricate your skin so the razor can do its job without causing irritation. I <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page68" title="68"/>sometimes shave in the shower with chemical-free soap. I haven’t used shaving cream since I was eighteen years old! Who needs it?</p>
<p class="TXT">If you feel the need to use a shaving product, pick a soap or cream with as few ingredients as you can find and without any of the garbage I’ve discussed in this chapter. Pay attention to the packaging, and definitely do not use anything that comes in an aerosol spray can.</p>
<p class="TXT">You could also try an electric razor. Or grow a beard.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Convenience: Deodorant</p>
<p class="TXF">The ability to sweat is one of the countless miracles responsible for our continued presence on this planet. But not everybody loves it. And—as happens so often—our attempts to outsmart Mother Nature only bring us to grief.</p>
<p class="TXT">Perspiration is our built-in air-conditioning system, designed to keep us at a proper body temperature even when, due to exertion or external temperatures, we’re overheating. If we couldn’t sweat, we’d bake inside our skins like potatoes and then die. Along with our livers and kidneys, perspiration rids our bodies of waste.</p>
<p class="TXT">Sweat is around 99 percent water, along with urea, uric acid, ammonia, lactic acid, vitamin C, and some other stuff. But it’s not the perspiration itself that causes body odor; that arises when it mixes with the bacteria on our skin. Since we have so many sweat glands under our arms, where it’s warm and dark, they’re a natural hot spot of stink.</p>
<p class="TXT">Once upon a time, when bathing habits were more relaxed, either you masked your body odor with perfume or you lived with it, the same as everybody around you. People were more pungent back then, no doubt, but probably less insecure when it came to social acceptability.</p>
<p class="TXT">Then, in 1888, an inventor came up with Mum, a cream containing an antibacterial, zinc oxide. It didn’t stop you from sweating, but it took away the smell. And in 1903, there was a fateful step forward: a product called Everdry used aluminum salts to prevent sweat from even forming, an innovation that probably seemed brilliant—at the time.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page69" title="69"/>Now we know that the deodorant-related danger comes from precisely that feature. Under various names (aluminum chlorohydrate, aluminum zirconium tetrachlorohydrex, aluminum zirconium trichlorohydrex), it is the key ingredient in all antiperspirant deodorants: the metal ions mix with sugar molecules in the sweat to form plugs that obstruct the sweat glands and stop sweat from escaping. Because we have these glands all over our bodies, the perspiration just comes out elsewhere, so we don’t overheat.</p>
<p class="TXT">Deodorant keeps our armpits arid, but what else does it do?</p>
<p class="TXT">Aluminum has been linked to cancer, especially of the breast tissue due to the armpit’s proximity. Research suggests that the metal salts cause changes in the estrogen receptors of breast cells, thereby increasing the risk of the disease. When Austrian researchers asked around four hundred women about their use of antiperspirants before the age of thirty, it was discovered that those who had applied it several times a day were more likely to have aluminum in their breast tissue—and also more likely to develop breast cancer.</p>
<p class="TXT">According to a 2005 paper in the <span class="ital">Journal of Inorganic Biochemistry</span>:</p>
<p class="EXT">Clinical studies showing a disproportionately high incidence of breast cancer in the upper outer quadrant of the breast together with reports of genomic instability in outer quadrants of the breast provide supporting evidence for a role for locally applied cosmetic chemicals in the development of breast cancer. Aluminum is known to have a genotoxic profile, capable of causing both DNA alterations and epigenetic effects, and this would be consistent with a potential role in breast cancer if such effects occurred in breast cells.</p>
<p class="TXT">The American Cancer Society says there is no clear link between antiperspirants and breast cancer because no epidemiological studies have confirmed the connection. Other research, according to the ACS, has found that breast cancer tissue doesn’t contain any more aluminum than healthy tissue.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page70" title="70"/>So there’s no smoking-gun proof that aluminum in deodorant can cause cancer. On the other hand, there are plenty of hints that point in that direction. I say: when in doubt, leave it out. There’s no possible advantage to having dry armpits that’s worth the risk of breast cancer (and remember that men get breast cancer, too).</p>
<p class="TXT">There could also be a link between aluminum and Alzheimer’s disease. A study from the 1980s found that people with the ailment had accumulations of aluminum in their brain neurons. (To be fair, the experts say it may have gotten there through contaminated water, food, or medications.)</p>
<p class="TXT">Some deodorants also contain polypropylene glycol, which can irritate the skin but is considered otherwise harmless. It should come as no surprise that big-brand products contain all the poisonous stuff we find everywhere in the personal care aisles: parabens, fragrance, triclosan, phthalates, and benzene in aerosol sprays. Sprays, with their hydrocarbons, are particularly harmful. By now I hope I don’t have to warn you: stay away from this junk.</p>
<p class="TXT">Finally, we’ve all heard about the importance of the microbiome, the bacteria in our gut that determine our health in a multitude of ways. Your skin has its own microbiome, and there’s a study suggesting that antiperspirants kill it off—one more way this personal care product harms rather than helps us.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Even if you aren’t concerned about the potential health hazards of antiperspirants, the environmental impact might worry you: though aluminum occurs naturally in the environment, humans have increased the concentration of it in drinking water. This is a problem not only for us but for other animals because aluminum acts as a neurotoxin, affecting the motor and cognitive abilities of aquatic vertebrates such as frogs. There’s also all that plastic in containers and packaging that we’re adding to the global overload.</p>
<p class="H2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page71" title="71"/>Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">First, try to cut back on your deodorant use. Go without it one day, and see if you (or anyone else) notices the difference. It’s possible that you’ve been worrying about nothing all these years.</p>
<p class="TXT">Use brands with as few ingredients as you can find.</p>
<p class="TXT">Some deodorants use talc to absorb moisture, but that can be contaminated with asbestos, a carcinogen. Try brands with cornstarch or tapioca starch instead. They are naturally zero aluminum.</p>
<p class="TXT">And don’t use aerosol sprays—in anything, not just deodorant, due to the benzene they contain. Use stick or roll-on products.</p>
<p class="TXT">Believe it or not, botulinum toxin, popularly known as botox, has been approved to eliminate underarm sweating. When injected, it blocks the signals that tell our glands it’s time to perspire. Originally, it was used to treat people afflicted with overactive sweat glands on the hands, then to paralyze facial muscles and give people a more youthful appearance. Underarms need about twenty-five shots each and cost around $2,000 per treatment, which is only temporary. That sounds slightly insane to me, but it has the advantage of not introducing any harmful chemicals into our bodies.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Convenience: Eye Makeup</p>
<p class="TXF">From Queen Nefertiti and Cleopatra thousands of years ago to Rihanna and Kim Kardashian today, bold black eye makeup has knocked us out with its beauty. At various times in history—even recent history—men, too, have sported eyeliner and mascara. Hello, Johnny Depp!</p>
<p class="TXT">In ancient times it was made of kohl, a mineral that might actually have had some antibacterial powers (not a small consideration before antibiotics came along). But kohl also contains antimony, lead, and other dangerous heavy metals, and when you apply it to the ultrathin skin surrounding the eyes, you’re asking for trouble. For that reason, it’s banned from cosmetic use today.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page72" title="72"/>What has replaced it? Parabens, propylene glycol, phthalates, petroleum—in other words, more toxic and even carcinogenic substances, the same ones that show up in so many other personal care products today. The fact that these are worn so close to the eyes poses the same dangers as kohl did, so maybe we haven’t really spared ourselves much harm.</p>
<p class="TXT">Realistically, how much of the harmful contents of eye makeup do we absorb? That question was answered in a 2016 study conducted by Dr. Kim Harley, a reproductive epidemiologist at the University of California, Berkeley. First, she tested the urine of a hundred adolescent girls who used conventional makeup and found detectable levels of phthalates and parabens—both of which are potentially endocrine-disrupting chemicals, meaning they can alter sex hormones. For the next three days, the girls used makeup that contained none of those substances, and their urine was tested again—and the levels of both chemicals had already fallen, “by 25 to 45 percent, on average,” Harley said. A huge reduction!</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">One alternative is to wear less eye makeup. We don’t always need to look as though we’re ready to be swarmed by paparazzi or headed to a glamorous night on the red carpet. We can give our eyes a break once in a while. Young women, whose hormones don’t need any extra interference, should be especially cautious when choosing eye makeup. Read the tiny print on the label and beware of the following ingredients.</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Carbon black, sometimes called D&amp;C Black No. 2, acetylene black, or channel black</li>
<li>Ethanolamine compounds, which are used as emulsifiers and fragrances and are potentially carcinogenic. On labels, they’re called triethanolamine (TEA), diethanolamine (DEA), cocamide DEA, cocamide MEA, DEA-cetyl phosphate, DEA-oleth-3 phosphate, lauramide DEA, linoleamide MEA, myristamide DEA, oleamide DEA, stearamide MEA, or TEA-lauryl sulfate.</li>
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page73" title="73"/>Styrene acrylates copolymer, which are used as coloring agents in cosmetics and other products. On labels, they’re listed as styrene acrylates copolymer, styrene-butadiene copolymer, polystyrene, styrene copolymer, styrene resin, ethylbenzene, or vinylbenzene.</li>
<li>Lead, antimony, and other heavy metals</li>
</ul>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Antiaging Creams</p>
<p class="TXF">Here is a perfect example of my problem with modern conveniences. There are tried-and-true ways to slow down how our bodies age. We just need to drink plenty of clean water, eat a healthy, mostly plant-based, whole-food/non-highly-processed diet, get enough physical activity, sleep eight hours a night, and keep up meaningful social connections.</p>
<p class="TXT">Do all that, and you’ll not only look as youthful as possible, you’ll feel that way, too. But that sounds like work. It requires effort and commitment for the rest of your life. There must be an easier, more convenient way, right?</p>
<p class="TXT">Well, there is, but only if you believe the absurd claims found on antiaging potions and lotions. These products prey on our desire for a quick fix, for the magical concoction of chemicals we can purchase in a drugstore and thereby avoid all the sensible, natural paths to maintaining youthfulness.</p>
<p class="TXT">It’s no surprise that we focus most of our antiaging efforts on our skin, the most superficial part of our bodies. If we can knock a decade or two off our faces, we’re satisfied and see no need to do anything further.</p>
<p class="TXT">There’s nothing new about our willingness to try just about anything to stop looking our age. Cleopatra supposedly bathed in donkey milk every day because she believed it softened and exfoliated her skin. To do so, she maintained a stable of seven hundred donkeys, which doesn’t sound too convenient to me. Women in Elizabethan England put thin slices of meat onto their faces to prevent wrinkles. No thanks!</p>
<p class="TXT">Today’s solutions sound more scientific, but they also expose us to health hazards unknown back in the early days of antiaging wizardry. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page74" title="74"/>The ingredients that make these products hazardous to your skin <span class="ital">and</span> your health aren’t the alleged antiaging components, which are usually either antioxidants or harmless alpha hydroxy acids such as citric acid, hyroxycaprylic acid, or hydroxycapric acid (and sometimes retinol, a form of vitamin A). The FDA tests these products, and aside from making skin more sensitive to UV rays, there seems to be little in them to worry about, except an FDA warning about products from overseas that may be contaminated with mercury. Instead, it’s the substances <span class="ital">added</span> to the mix—stuff that makes the lotions and creams easy to apply and keeps them shelf stable—that create the most potential for harm.</p>
<p class="TXT">One culprit is the “forever chemicals” PFOAs and PFASs. These, you will remember, are present in thousands of products we use in our daily lives. In antiaging creams, they have been found as contaminants of another class of chemicals, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), present in big brands. They make things smooth and slippery, which sounds useful when you’re talking about youthful skin.</p>
<p class="TXT">But PFOAs have been linked to several cancers (including ovarian and breast), thyroid disease, high cholesterol levels, and disruptions of the endocrine system—none of which sounds worth the promise of softer skin. And we have no way of knowing if our products contain these substances, because contaminants aren’t listed among the ingredients.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">The best option, as I started by saying, is to take care of your health by adopting good habits and abandoning bad ones. You can do that now. I have created programs where after three weeks of hydrating, eating right, and exercising, people literally come alive. You can see it everywhere, including in their skin and eyes.</p>
<p class="TXT">Be grateful for the fact that you’re aging. I don’t care how many wrinkles you have, it’s a lot better than the alternative.</p>
<p class="TXT">What can we do? Avoid anything containing PTFE, polyperfluoro-<span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page75" title="75"/>methylisopropyl ether, or DEA-C8-18 perfluoroalkylethyl phosphate on the label. Frankly, I don’t understand how anyone could knowingly put substances with names as long and scary as those on their skin. But I think people make a habit of never reading labels—what you don’t know can’t hurt you, right? Anyway, it’s too much work, and we never understand them (until now!).</p>
<p class="TXT">According to the Campaign for Safe Cosmetics’ Red List, we should stay away from antiaging products or moisturizers containing placental extracts, which can contain progesterone or estrogen; UV filters such as octinoxate, oxybenzone, or homosalate; and petrolatum, for possible polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) contamination.</p>
<p class="TXT">Anything containing fragrance, parabens, 1,4-dioxane, or polyethylene glycol (PEG) is also risky and should be shunned.</p>
<p class="TXT">No one actually needs any of these products, for the simple reason that they don’t do much aside from making users poorer and preying on those who are insecure about their looks. Do you honestly believe a magic potion capable of defying biology, the aging process, and the passage of time can be found in a plastic tube? It’s like Ponce de León believing he could discover the fountain of youth. Instead, all he wound up with was Florida.</p>
<p class="TXT">Follow these suggestions, and you won’t need any product that calls itself “antiaging,” even if such a thing existed, which it doesn’t. The only guaranteed antiaging product is death: after you die, you’ll never be a day older.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Shampoo</p>
<p class="TXF">We’re all a little weird about our hair.</p>
<p class="TXT">Unlike skin or teeth, it doesn’t serve a very important role in our well-being. It protects our scalp from the sun, true, and keeps some body heat from escaping during winter. If the need arises, it provides a little cushioning for our skulls, where our delicate brains reside. Did I leave anything out? But all of us, men as well as women, attach a great deal of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page76" title="76"/>importance to the state of our hair. It’s a symbol of animal good health and youthful vitality. The thicker and more lustrous it is, the more beautiful and powerful we feel. Good hair is sexy!</p>
<p class="TXT">We don’t only demand that it looks amazing—it ought to smell great, too, and feel silky and soft, if the commercials are to be believed. Bouncy, too? Sure, why not? Anything, as long as it makes us irresistible. So it’s no surprise that we spend huge sums on the care and feeding of our follicles, on gels, mousses, sprays, waxes, creams, ointments, and various other products, not to mention bleaches, dyes, tints, and on and on.</p>
<p class="TXT">We can credit (or blame) our hair lust on the shampoo manufacturer John Breck, who, back in 1929, hired an artist to draw pictures of women with fabulous hair for his ads. Modern formulations were first introduced in the 1930s with Drene, which got rid of oiliness using synthetic chemicals called surfactants instead of plain old soap. In the 1950s, the chemist and salon owner Jheri Redding created the first “crème rinse conditioner,” which used protein to repair split ends and other damage caused by, among other things, overwashing.</p>
<p class="TXT">But not everything in shampoo and conditioner promotes clean, healthy hair. One chemical isn’t even listed on the label. It’s not an ingredient, technically speaking—it’s a by-product of the manufacturing process. Known as 1,4-dioxane, it’s been found in more than eighty shampoos, cosmetics, and other products. A 2016 report by the National Institutes of Health’s National Toxicology Program says that 1,4-dioxane is “reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen based on sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity from studies in experimental animals.” The EPA has also classified 1,4-dioxane as “likely to be carcinogenic to humans.”</p>
<p class="TXT">It’s impossible to know for certain which shampoo brands contain it, but ingredients associated with it include sodium laureth sulfate, polyethylene glycol (PEG), polyethylene, polyoxyethlene, and all chemicals that end with <span class="ital">oxynol</span>. Being careful about using shampoo won’t necessarily <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page77" title="77"/>protect you from 1,4-dioxane, however; the EWG has also found it in tap water in forty-five states, serving 90 million Americans.</p>
<p class="TXT">Another substance to look out for is cocamide DEA, a foaming agent derived from coconut oil, which might lead you to think that it’s harmless. But it’s not—in 1986 it was added to the state of California’s list of substances found in consumer products that might cause cancer, birth defects, or other reproductive harm. The FDA claims there’s no reason to worry about it, but it also provides a list of common ingredient names related to this chemical: cocamide DEA, cocamide MEA, DEA-cetyl phosphate, DEA-oleth-3 phosphate, lauramide DEA, linoleamide MEA, myristamide DEA, oleamide DEA, stearamide MEA, TEA-lauryl sulfate, and triethanolamine.</p>
<p class="TXT">I’ve even found cocamide in a so-called clean shampoo! Here’s a tip: if your shampoo makes a luxuriant amount of suds, beware. Bubbles mean trouble.</p>
<p class="TXT">Shampoo may also contain other chemicals that are potentially toxic or carcinogenic or act as endocrine disruptors. They include:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Preservatives such as parabens, formaldehyde, ketoconazole (an antidandruff ingredient and potential endocrine disrupter), and methylisothiazolinone (an allergen that’s also toxic to aquatic life)</li>
<li>Selenium sulfide, an antidandruff chemical that the National Cancer Institute says is “reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen”</li>
<li>Fragrance, unless the label identifies which individual chemicals are used</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">The use of dry powder to clean hair isn’t new—in fact, back in Elizabethan days, before running water, people put powder onto their hair to reduce its oil and odor. Today, there is dry shampoo—an alcohol- or starch-based product in a spray can that soaks up the oil rather than washing it away. But if the propellant contains isobutane, it might also be contaminated with the carcinogen benzene. This is why anything using an aerosol spray is best avoided.</p>
<p class="H2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page78" title="78"/>Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">First, recognize that unless you’ve been rolling around in the mud, your hair probably isn’t dirty—and what makes it feel oily isn’t oil, it’s sebum, the waxy substance our bodies produce to protect our skin. The surfactants in shampoo are what permit the soap to wash the sebum away, but keep in mind that as we age, our follicles dry out, which is why most of us don’t need to shampoo more than once a week. Using less shampoo will also spare us some chemical exposures.</p>
<p class="TXT">Second, accept the fact that shampoo is just soap, not a magic potion. You can use any simple, basic soap on your hair, including the same kind you use on your body, and get good results. Mountains of lather don’t mean that your hair is getting any cleaner, shinier, bouncier, or sexier. It could just mean that you’re being dosed with chemicals you should avoid. So don’t fall for the hair hype.</p>
<p class="TXT">Though hair thickness and texture are mostly genetic, taking care of your body will also make your hair look healthy. Follicles need protein, minerals, and vitamins, and nutritional deficiencies affect hair growth and quality. UV rays and cigarette smoke can also damage hair. Another way to ensure healthy hair is to maintain proper weight; research from Japan found that obesity can lead to depletion of follicle stem cells, resulting in hair loss.</p>
</body>
</html>