<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Fatal Conveniences</title>
  <link href="../Styles/FatalConveniences.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1096cf69-c1c2-4b94-ac1d-5d952fe64055" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<p class="CN"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH008"><span class="blue"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page175" title="175"/>8</span></a></p>
<p class="CT"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH008"><span class="blue">Household Products</span></a></p>
<p class="TXFF"><span class="boldsc">HOME IS SUPPOSED TO BE THE</span> safest place in the world, where we go to feel secure, protected, and at ease. So how did it end up so dangerous? Maybe that’s slightly exaggerated. But home sweet home is definitely not as safe as we imagine.</p>
<p class="TXT">First, it may be a little <span class="ital">too</span> comfortable. It contains so many wonderful things, and we love them all so well that we find no reason to leave. Our ancestors were just the opposite, spending most of their time working outdoors and coming in only to eat and sleep.</p>
<p class="TXT">I’m not suggesting that we go back in time, but the truth is that our biology is not made for this lifestyle. I just read a worrisome statistic: Americans and most other people today spend nearly 92 percent of our time indoors. That probably means we’re not getting enough fresh air and sunlight to keep us healthy. And we’re not being as physically active as we should be.</p>
<p class="TXT">Once, home was a shelter from the harsh elements. It was a box. Now it’s heaven on Earth. It’s <span class="ital">too convenient.</span> Even something as basic as going out to dinner and a movie has been replaced by Uber Eats and HBO in your pajamas.</p>
<p class="TXT">But the hazards of home go way beyond that. We live in well-built, completely insulated containers filled with furniture and furnishings made using chemicals that have been proven to be harmful to our health. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page176" title="176"/>We keep our houses clean and germ free with products made from toxic chemicals capable of causing everything from rashes to kidney disease.</p>
<p class="TXT">Your sofa? Phthalates. Your bedsheets? Formaldehyde. Your Tupperware containers? Your laundry detergent? Bad stuff at every turn. Even air fresheners find a way to make your air less safe than when it smelled like plain old air. All those ultrapowerful all-purpose cleaning products that promise to kill germs and mold? What else do you think they might be killing?</p>
<p class="TXT">Let’s find out.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Home Cleaning Products</p>
<p class="TXF">Clean is good. How about <span class="ital">too</span> clean? What happens if the ways we reach maximum cleanliness wind up scouring us, too?</p>
<p class="TXT">As we saw in the chapter on personal care products, we tend to go overboard when it comes to ridding our bodies of grit and grime. It’s no surprise that we do the same when it comes to our surroundings. Is it because we’re germophobic? Or maybe it’s peer pressure thanks to all those big corporate marketing budgets.</p>
<p class="TXT">Either way, the supermarket shelves are full of products that eradicate dirt, leaving our world sparkling and spotless. But how do they go about it?</p>
<p class="TXT">Of the substances regulated by the federal Toxic Substances Control Act, there were at last count 86,228 different chemicals listed. Can you imagine trying to monitor all of them? About half are currently being produced and included in products we use—still a huge number. Of those, almost eight thousand have what the government calls “confidential identities,” meaning that the manufacturer doesn’t have to tell anybody the precise makeup of the toxic substance because it’s considered a trade secret.</p>
<p class="TXT">Under that law, it’s the job of the EPA to assess the risks to our health and our environment caused by substances found in consumer products. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page177" title="177"/>But don’t feel too reassured; the EPA has reviewed only a small percentage of those chemicals and forced even fewer off the market.</p>
<p class="TXT">In other words, nobody is protecting you from cleaning products that do more harm than good. If the chemicals in them are capable of wiping out every bit of crud found in the average home, imagine what they can do to you—your skin, your lungs, your eyes—and how they might affect your kids and your pets, too.</p>
<p class="TXT">The main danger is the presence of volatile organic compounds, or VOCs. These are man-made chemicals often found not only in home cleaning products but also in paint, dry-cleaning fluid, and a long list of other hazardous things we encounter every day. Their volatility means that they off-gas, or spew as invisible vapor, their contents into the air we breathe—straight into our lungs.</p>
<p class="TXT">According to an article in the journal <span class="ital">Occupational &amp; Environmental Medicine</span>, the VOCs and other chemicals released when we use cleaning supplies contribute to chronic respiratory problems, allergic reactions, headaches, and more. Preservatives containing formaldehyde are also commonly added to multiuse cleaning products.</p>
<p class="TXT">The Environmental Working Group does a great job of testing household cleaning products. An evaluation of twenty-one of them found that they emitted more than 450 chemicals into the air, including compounds linked to asthma, developmental and reproductive damage, even cancer. Studies have shown that infants exposed in the womb to cleaning products used by their mothers may suffer from lowered birth weight, lowered IQ, and respiratory symptoms that may persist throughout childhood.</p>
<p class="TXT">Are you starting to catch my drift? One product, many untested chemicals; many products, endless exposures to chemicals, many of which are known to be harmful.</p>
<p class="TXT">Cleaning supplies and household products containing VOCs and other toxic substances include just about everything you use to keep your house gleaming. And that’s not all they contain. Here’s a rundown of just some of the toxicity we welcome into our homes.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page178" title="178"/>All-purpose cleaners, the ones meant for every surface, commonly include ammonia, ethylene glycol monobutyl ether acetate, sodium hypochlorite, and trisodium phosphate. They’re sometimes listed on the labels. None of these is safe for us to be around. None!</p>
<p class="TXT">Ammonia is found in lots of home cleaning products; just the smell tells us that serious cleaning is going on. But in reality, it’s a heavy-duty industrial-strength chemical that can pose serious dangers. According to the CDC, “High levels of ammonia can irritate and burn the skin, mouth, throat, lungs, and eyes. Very high levels of ammonia can damage the lungs or cause death. . . . The level of exposure depends upon dose, duration, and work being done.”</p>
<p class="TXT">As with many cleaning products, the biggest danger is to people who use the chemicals in the workplace, hour after hour and year after year. But even smaller doses threaten our health unless we’re careful.</p>
<p class="TXT">Rug- and upholstery-cleaning products can contain tetrachloroethylene or perchloroethylene, also known as PEC or PERC, which is also the main chemical used in dry cleaning. According to the CDC, exposure may cause irritation to the eyes, skin, nose, throat, and respiratory system. Naphthalene and ammonium hydroxide are also found in these products. The EPA classifies naphthalene as a possible human carcinogen. Merely inhaling the fumes from these products may cause dizziness, nausea, loss of appetite, and disorientation. Though you might be tempted to say, “Big deal, those all wear off,” you must wonder what else in your brain is being affected by these chemicals. There’s also evidence that links them to liver damage and cancer.</p>
<p class="TXT">Bleach, the kind used for laundry but also in general cleaning products, contains the chemical sodium hypochlorite in various concentrations, ranging from 0.7 percent to 5.25 percent. The potential for damage to our health rises along with the percentage, which is usually noted on the label. Chlorine bleach liquid and the vapors it creates can irritate the eyes, skin, and throat, which will come as no surprise to anyone who uses it.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page179" title="179"/>When bleach is mixed with ammonia, toxic gases called chloramines are produced and cause symptoms such as:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Coughing</li>
<li>Nausea</li>
<li>Shortness of breath</li>
<li>Chest pain</li>
<li>Wheezing</li>
<li>Even pneumonia and fluid in the lungs!</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">When bleach is mixed with acids, as in some drain and toilet cleaners, the chlorine is off-gassed. Even at low levels and for short periods of time, it will irritate the mucous membranes—meaning your eyes, throat, and nose—and cause coughing, breathing problems, burning and watery eyes, and runny nose. High levels of exposure can cause chest pain, severe breathing difficulties, and vomiting. <span class="ital">Very</span> high levels can even cause death.</p>
<p class="TXT">The main ingredient in automatic and hand dishwashing detergents is phosphate. Automatic dishwashing detergents have been known to cause skin irritations or burns; dish detergents for washing by hand are milder.</p>
<p class="TXT">Furniture cleaners may contain petroleum distillates, which can irritate your mucous membranes when inhaled and may be absorbed through the skin. These chemicals can also affect the nervous system, causing headache, dizziness, nausea, and loss of balance and coordination. They may even affect the liver and kidneys.</p>
<p class="TXT">Furniture polish (not cleaner) typically contains one or more of the following: ammonia, naphtha, nitrobenzene, petroleum distillates, and phenol. Naphtha may contain benzene, a carcinogen. Repeated exposure may damage the nervous system and affect the kidneys.</p>
<p class="TXT">Toilet cleaners may contain sodium hypochlorite, hydrochloric acid, or bleach, all of which can be irritating to eyes, skin, and throat.</p>
<p class="TXT">Chlorine and alkyl ammonium chlorides are the common fungicide <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page180" title="180"/>chemicals found in mold and mildew removers, which can cause breathing problems.</p>
<p class="TXT">Clogged-drain cleaners contain lye and sulfuric acid, both of which are heavy duty. Lye burns; that’s why it’s effective, but also why it’s so dangerous. Sulfuric acid not only irritates skin and eyes but can also damage the kidneys, liver, and digestive tract. These chemicals produce fumes that can burn skin and can cause blindness if they accidentally get into your eyes. Of course, you would never use this stuff so carelessly. Still, do you want something so powerful in your house if it’s unnecessary?</p>
<p class="TXT">Window and glass cleaners usually contain ammonia and isopropanol, a form of alcohol, which are irritating to the eyes, skin, nose, and throat.</p>
<p class="TXT">All-purpose cleaners and disinfecting wipes contain asthmagens, chemicals that can worsen asthma and even cause it. Studies show that using traditional cleaning sprays just once a week may increase your risk of developing adult-onset asthma. Common asthmagens and respiratory irritants in cleaning products include quaternary ammonium compounds, also called quats, ethanolamines, glutaral, and sodium hypochlorite (chlorine bleach).</p>
<p class="TXT">Toilet cleaners, oven cleaners, and heavy-duty degreasers containing hydrochloric acid, phosphoric acid, sodium or potassium hydroxide, or ethanolamines can all cause lung irritation.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">I’ve just listed the harsh and toxic chemicals our cleaning products include. What kind of impact do you imagine they have once they go down our drains and into the world? Many of the products we use, such as laundry and dishwasher detergents, contain phosphorus or nitrogen, which can harm aquatic life. Surfactants, commonly found in cleaning products, biodegrade slowly and cause similar damage; one such chemical, alkylphenol ethoxylates, is even an endocrine disruptor. When wastewater <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page181" title="181"/>is properly treated, these chemicals are usually removed, but that’s not always the case.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">Start with this thought: If opening a container of a cleaning product immediately makes your eyes water or your nose burn, or gives you the sensation of being in the presence of something superpotent, pay attention! If it seems toxic, it probably is. At that point, ask yourself if your house is really filthy enough to require such high-powered cleaning. The answer is likely a definite <span class="ital">no</span>.</p>
<p class="TXT">Instead, use warm, soapy water and see how that works. I’m betting that it will do most jobs just as well as the toxic household staples do. If that’s not enough, baking soda and water is a great abrasive scrubber. A solution of white vinegar and water mixed in a spray bottle does as good a job on glass as any industrial-strength cleaner. It’s also good for bathroom surfaces such as porcelain and tile. And it’s cheap. If you want your cleaning product to smell nice, add a few drops of essential oil, such as lavender or tea tree oil, to the spray bottle. And believe it or not, straight vodka is a great cleaning fluid.</p>
<p class="TXT">If you need something stronger, stick with the old-school cleansers such as Bon Ami, which contains natural materials such as ground feldspar and baking soda, with no unnecessary ingredients.</p>
<p class="TXT">If you still want to use commercial products, read the labels. There, amid all the multisyllable chemical names, you will probably find a few of those I’ve been trying to warn you against. Look instead for products that have either no or reduced VOCs, irritants, flammables, or fragrances. Today, there are forward-thinking companies that put this information onto their labels.</p>
<p class="TXT">Be especially wary of antibacterial products containing triclosan. They’re the reason we’re all in danger from drug-resistant bugs. Triclosan has even been linked to increased allergen sensitivity and disruption of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page182" title="182"/>the thyroid function. If you use plain soap and water, the bacteria in your home won’t harm you.</p>
<p class="TXT">Don’t use products that contain quaternary ammonium compounds, or quats. These chemicals are associated with asthma, as well as reduced fertility and birth defects in animals.</p>
<p class="TXT">If you do use a noxious commercial product, keep the area well ventilated with an open window or two and maybe a fan. And wear rubber gloves while using it.</p>
<p class="TXT">Instead of using one of those insanely powerful (and toxic) drain cleaners to clear a clog, try an old-school mechanical snake, which you can buy in any hardware store. If that’s not working, pour a cup of baking soda and then a cup of white vinegar down the drain, then plug it for half an hour. Once the bubbles die down, run the hot water.</p>
<p class="TXT">Finally, check out the Environmental Protection Agency’s list of products that meet its Safer Choice requirements for cleaning and other needs at epa.gov/saferchoice.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Convenience: Carpeting</p>
<p class="TXF">You know that great new-carpet smell? It means your rugs are off-gassing toxic chemicals into your nasal passages and lungs and those of your loved ones, pets included. You’re inhaling PFAS “forever chemicals” linked to cancer, developmental disorders, and endocrine disruption. You’re taking in formaldehyde, too, as well as phthalates. All so stains won’t stick, meaning that your rug will be more pristine than you are.</p>
<p class="TXT">In 2021, the California Department of Toxic Substances Control adopted new regulations on carpets and rugs containing PFASs “due to concerns about the hazard traits of PFASs and their widespread presence in the environment, humans, and other living organisms. Carpets and rugs treated with PFASs for stain- or soil-resistance are potential long-term sources of widespread human and ecological exposures to this class of chemicals.” California tends to be the pioneer of protecting consumers from harmful chemicals in everyday products, so no matter where we live, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page183" title="183"/>we can take this tip and be careful when it comes to rugs as well as the padding and adhesives that go beneath them.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">One source states that more than 4 billion pounds of carpeting are discarded annually in the United States, and of that, less than 5 percent is recycled. Where do the rest of our used rugs wind up? Either in landfills or burned in incinerators—meaning that all those toxic chemicals that once filled our homes with off-gassing now fill our air and land and probably, at some point, our water, too.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">First, ease up on the carpeting. Use flooring made of natural materials such as bamboo, wood, tile, natural linoleum, even cement, leaving as much of it uncovered as possible. That means using area rugs instead of wall-to-wall, of course, and rugs should be made of wool, sisal, jute, cotton, or some other nonsynthetic fiber. Use felt or wool padding instead of polyester, or choose carpets with a natural rubber backing.</p>
<p class="TXT">Don’t buy rugs that have been treated with stain-resistant chemicals—you’ll be inhaling the VOCs for a long time. Instead, either wipe your feet well before entering your home or leave your shoes at your home’s entrance and keep your rugs clean that way. Otherwise, all the dirt, dust, pollen, and other junk that gets caught in your carpet will become a permanent part of your environment.</p>
<p class="TXT">Once you’ve invested in natural fiber carpets and take precautions to keep them clean and in good condition, they’ll last longer than synthetics since they are more durable—which is good because they’re going to cost you more money—but they’re worth it.</p>
<p class="H1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page184" title="184"/>Fatal Convenience: Air-Conditioning</p>
<p class="TXF">Considering that intense heat waves can kill people, it’s hard to knock air-conditioning as a Fatal Convenience. It’s probably kept more people alive than it’s harmed. But that doesn’t mean it’s without its downsides. On the one hand, when it’s blazing hot and crazy humid outside, who doesn’t turn on the AC? As the planet heats up, we’ll need it more than ever. Depending on where you live, it may run nonstop from May through September—nearly half the year. On the other hand, you’re completely altering the air inside your home, meaning the air inside your lungs, too—and often, you’re making it worse.</p>
<p class="TXT">Air-conditioning doesn’t just cool the air, it dehumidifies it, too. In fact, that was its first purpose, back in 1902, when an engineer named Willis Carrier designed an apparatus to keep paper from shrinking in the summer. His invention worked because when hot, humid air hit chilled coils, the humidity was stripped away. Carrier went on to cofound the first air-conditioner company, which still dominates the industry.</p>
<p class="TXT">It wasn’t until the 1940s that air conditioners became small and cheap enough to be used in homes, and today virtually every American house has at least one, or a central AC system. As poverty rates fall elsewhere in the world, they’re catching on everywhere, especially in parts of the southern hemisphere, where it gets <span class="ital">really</span> hot.</p>
<p class="TXT">The main health perils of air conditioners have to do with how well they are maintained. If filters are regularly cleaned and replaced when necessary, there’s not much harm done. Often, however, upkeep is neglected. When that happens, all the dirt, dust, and allergens that go from the outside atmosphere into the system come spewing out at you.</p>
<p class="TXT">If you spend any amount of time in an office, a school, or some other public place where you have no control over the AC, you’re at the mercy of somebody who may not be as concerned about your health as you are. A 2014 study found that women working in offices with central air-conditioning had higher-than-average rates of absence due to sickness and more visits to ear, nose, and throat doctors. In another study, 8 percent of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page185" title="185"/>people who worked in air-conditioned environments suffered from daily headaches.</p>
<p class="TXT">The likely reason is that air-conditioning’s power to dehumidify dries out the mucus membranes in our noses, throats, and ears. When that happens, we lose some of our ability to fight off infections. It also leads to headaches and lethargy.</p>
<p class="TXT">There’s even a phenomenon known as <span class="ital">sick building syndrome</span>, where our totally sealed and controlled indoor environments become hotbeds of health problems. Thanks to AC, most buildings today are sealed off from the outside world, which does us no good.</p>
<p class="TXT">Beyond all that, spending so much time in cool environments lowers our natural tolerance for heat, meaning that once we’re hooked on air-conditioning, it becomes progressively harder to give it up. Our internal thermostat becomes desensitized from lack of use, and we produce less sweat.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Early air conditioners used Freon, a chlorofluorocarbon that depletes the ozone layer and thereby increases global warming. In the 1980s, the infamous “ozone hole” over Antarctica was detected, leading to a worldwide ban on Freon. Its replacement, hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), don’t deplete the ozone, but they do absorb the sun’s radiation and keep heat from escaping from our atmosphere—which only leads to increased demand for air-conditioning. The EPA has begun requiring manufacturers to phase out HFCs and replace them with other alternatives.</p>
<p class="TXT">Then there is the extraordinary energy requirement created by our desire for totally controlled, seriously cool air even during the hottest months. Once upon a time, we took sweating during the summer for granted. We all did it, so nobody felt singled out. And sweating is good for our health because it helps rid our bodies of toxins and waste.</p>
<p class="TXT">Air-conditioning in the United States uses as much energy as that in the entire continent of Africa, and the International Energy Agency <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page186" title="186"/>projects that before long, global air-conditioning will use about 13 percent of all electricity worldwide. As the nations of the southern hemisphere come out of poverty, their citizens will begin buying air conditioners to escape the ever-increasing heat. And who can blame them?</p>
<p class="TXT">Today, perspiration is optional. Unless you are required to be outdoors in summer, it’s possible to go from home to car to office or store or wherever else it is you’re going in constant air-conditioned comfort—and never be exposed to hot weather for more than a few seconds at a time. Personally, I love to sweat. It means that I’m alive and my body is functioning.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">How about this: Don’t turn on the AC! Or leave it off until it’s truly painful living without it. First see if opening a few windows and turning on a fan or two is enough to make life tolerable. Try wearing less clothing, especially at home.</p>
<p class="TXT">Investing in the most efficient AC systems could cut our future demand in half. And more energy-efficient windows and proper shades can be massively helpful, especially in the summer.</p>
<p class="TXT">Here are some tips from the US Department of Energy.</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Install window coverings such as shades or blinds to prevent heat gain through your windows during the day.</li>
<li>Keep your house warmer than normal when you are away and lower the thermostat setting only when you return home. A programmable thermostat allows you to do this automatically and without sacrificing comfort.</li>
<li>Vacuum your air intake vents regularly to remove dust buildup. Ensure that furniture and other objects are not blocking the airflow through your air conditioners or central air-conditioning registers.</li>
<li>Seal cracks and openings around windows and doors to prevent warm air from leaking into your home. Add caulk or weather stripping to seal air leaks.</li>
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page187" title="187"/>Maintain and clean air filters annually; this is important for energy efficiency and to keep possible allergens at bay.</li>
<li>Look into buying a lower-emissions system with a refrigerant packed in factory-sealed, leakproof tubing.</li>
<li>When it’s time to replace an old air conditioner, hire a professional to remove the coolant safely so that none of it leaks into the environment.</li>
</ul>
<p class="H1">Fatal Convenience: Laundry Detergent</p>
<p class="TXF">We’ve all seen old photos of women on riverbanks doing laundry by soaking it in the river and beating it on rocks. Looks like fun for maybe the first five minutes but after that, total arm-busting drudgery. Compare it to today, when we can just toss our dirty clothes into a machine, add detergent, hit a button or two, and like magic—clean clothing, ready to dry in yet another machine and then wear. It’s hard to begrudge ourselves a little convenience, especially when laundry day comes around. How many of us live near a river anyway?</p>
<p class="TXT">The machines are fine, I guess. The detergents are not.</p>
<p class="TXT">We’ve been washing clothes for as long as we’ve been wearing them, though we haven’t always been as fastidious as we are today. We used to make all our soaps at home of animal fats and ash from wood fires, which contained a cleaning agent, potassium carbonate. Sounds like a lot of work, but at least the ingredients were natural.</p>
<p class="TXT">The first detergent using industrial chemicals was made by Germans during World War I, because they needed to save animal fats for more pressing needs. It was called Nekal and was only a so-so cleaning product but was an effective wetting agent that is still used in industry today.</p>
<p class="TXT">After the war, the US consumer product giant Procter &amp; Gamble brought that detergent home, re-created it in its labs here, and introduced the first American-made laundry soap, Dreft, a powder. Before long, the company added sodium tripolyphosphate to the detergent and called it Tide. The detergent captured 30 percent of the US laundry soap market and remains the best seller here today.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page188" title="188"/>As usually happens, once a necessity becomes a big consumer product category, health hazards begin creeping in. In 2008, researchers at the University of Washington released a study revealing that the top-selling laundry products emit dozens—<span class="ital">dozens</span>—of different chemicals that can damage our health. Of the 1,147 laundry products evaluated in the Environmental Working Group’s guide to healthy cleaning, only 185 earned an A rating, meaning that the rest had low or no concern for ingredients that may cause cancer, developmental and reproductive difficulties, respiratory problems, skin irritation and allergies, and environmental hazards.</p>
<p class="TXT">That should give you a good idea of what you’re up against in the laundry aisle. Our clothes come out clean, fresh, and smelling sweet—and full of chemicals capable of causing everything from a rash to cancer.</p>
<p class="TXT">Companies tend to use sodium laureth sulfate (SLES) in detergents because it’s a cheap way to create foam, which we all take as a sign of hard-core cleansing action. The main problem is that when it goes through the process called ethoxylation, there’s a potential for contamination with a possible carcinogen called 1,4-dioxane.</p>
<p class="TXT">Detergents may also contain optical brighteners, which sound like a contradiction in terms, colorless dyes derived from the chemical stilbene, which can cause irritation of the respiratory tract, skin, and eyes. These additives absorb ultraviolet light and reemit it as visible fluorescence, making our clothes look whiter.</p>
<p class="TXT">Detergent allergies can arise from surfactants, preservatives such as parabens (you might remember them from the earlier chapter about personal products), which are also endocrine disrupters, and fragrance, which—as I’ve said over and over—is a sign that potentially harmful chemicals have been included for no practical reason. We need to get over our slavery to smell. The EPA’s guide to detergent lists around fifty brands that don’t add fragrances. So detergents that still use it should be easy to skip.</p>
<p class="H2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page189" title="189"/>How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Once, detergents for laundry and dishwashers contained phosphates, which made water softer and got our clothes cleaner. But once those chemicals reached our waterways, they caused unnatural algae blooms, which in turn starved aquatic life of oxygen. Phosphates have been banned by governments, but the problem remains because other chemicals used in detergents create the same effect. As a result, the algae decompose and create underwater “dead zones” that kill fish and plants. Pretty much every chemical contained in big-brand detergents winds up in our waterways, and they all contribute to the harm.</p>
<p class="TXT">And of course, liquid detergent tends to come in big plastic jugs, meaning that we defile our surroundings with more pointless pollution when we throw the containers away. Some manufacturers—though not enough of them—now sell the stuff in biodegradable pouches. If we customers demand it, though, maybe that will change.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">When you go shopping, compare labels and find the products that use the fewest ingredients. Some detergents use only three, such as baking soda (sodium bicarbonate), washing soda (sodium carbonate), and soap or vegetable oils. Castile soap and borax are also safe. Avoid any product containing:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Phosphates</li>
<li>Fragrances</li>
<li>Optical brighteners</li>
<li>2-butoxyethanol</li>
<li>Diethanolamine</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">Choose fragrance-free products. If you want clothes that smell like something other than clothes, add a few drops of essential oil, such as lavender, to wool dryer balls.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page190" title="190"/>Use as little detergent as possible, which is probably less than the manufacturer recommends. Unless you work on an oil rig or somewhere else that leaves your garments deeply filthy, try cutting back on detergent and see how your clothes come out.</p>
<p class="TXT">Even better, hang them outdoors in sunlight and fresh air and see if maybe they’d be acceptable to wear in polite company. If there’s a small stain, see if a stain remover stick can do the job.</p>
<p class="TXT">Buy sustainably produced and packaged detergents that are third party certified by UL Solutions’ ECOLOGO or by Green Seal.</p>
<p class="TXT">To make life really convenient, check out either the EPA’s Safer Choice database (epa.gov/saferchoice) or the EWG guide to cleaners (ewg.org/guides/cleaners) to find detergents and other products that perform well and are safe for our health and the environment. Also, see <a href="../Text/CH010.xhtml"><span class="blue">chapter 10</span></a> for some of my suggestions.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Dryer Sheets</p>
<p class="TXF">Seriously, how harmful can a flimsy little slip of fabric be? Especially when you consider how soft and sweet smelling it leaves your clothes. Think again, my friend—there’s a lot of badness contained in that tiny bit of laundry magic.</p>
<p class="TXT">Why is it that the most trivial Fatal Conveniences start life in the minds of serious inventors? You’d think they’d have more serious things to think about. In the 1960s, a man named Conrad Gaiser wanted to make things a little easier for his wife by sparing her a trip down four flights of stairs to add liquid softener to the washer on the ground floor of their apartment building at the exact moment the wash cycle ended. He poured some softener onto a piece of cotton fabric, so now she could drop a sheet into the dryer at her leisure. He named his invention Tumble Puffs, patented it, and sold it to Procter &amp; Gamble, which called it the Bounce dryer sheet. The rest is Fatal Convenience history.</p>
<p class="TXT">Dryer sheets work in kind of a weird way: they are made of woven polyester fabric coated with a chemical that melts in the heat of your <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page191" title="191"/>dryer and transfers onto your clothes. This gives your garments a slippery surface that feels to us like softness, while also perfuming them and cutting down on static electricity. It’s an improvement, I guess, at least superficially.</p>
<p class="TXT">What’s the downside? Start with quaternary ammonium compounds, or quats, which make clothes feel soft and cuddly right out of the washer but can also trigger an asthma attack and may even be harmful to the reproductive system. Check labels for these ingredients and avoid them: distearyldimonium chloride and anything else ending in “-monium chloride.” Softeners may also include chemicals such as methylisothiazolinone (it even sounds lethal!) and glutaral, both of which can trigger asthma attacks and allergies. Also steer clear of ingredients described as “biodegradable fabric softening agent” or “cationic surfactant.”</p>
<p class="TXT">Aside from softening, the whole point of dryer sheets is that they make clothing smell fresher and cleaner—which we weirdly require even though we just took them out of the washer. As everywhere else in the world of Fatal Convenience, fragrance usually means trouble. Fabric softeners (whether liquid or sheets) may contain phthalates, which disperse the scent, and galaxolide, a synthetic musk that accumulates in the body. But remember that all fragrance is risky because manufacturers refuse to tell us which chemicals they’re using. That’s a good reason to skip softeners totally.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Softener sheets do their damage to the planet in two ways. First, research by Dr. Anne Steinemann at the University of California, Los Angeles, has shown that more than twenty-five volatile organic compounds are emitted from dryer vents, including nine classified as toxic or hazardous, with the highest concentrations being acetone, acetaldehyde, ethanol, methanol, and limonene. Fragranced laundry products can also emit VOCs including alpha-pinene, linalool, and D-limonene. And terpenes <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page192" title="192"/>in the sheets can react with ozone to generate pollutants such as formaldehyde and ultrafine particles.</p>
<p class="TXT">The second way is due to all the single-use polyester sheets that we’re adding to every other bit of nonbiodegradable junk we discard. It never ends.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">As I find myself beginning so many of these “Okay, So What Should We Do?” entries, here’s my best advice: Stop using dryer sheets! By now it’s possible that you’ve become addicted to the aroma of artificially scented laundry. Go cold turkey for a couple of days, and see if you can kick the habit altogether. Remember, they aren’t really making your clothes soft, just slippery.</p>
<p class="TXT">Try adding a half cup of distilled white vinegar to the washer during the rinse cycle and see if that doesn’t make your clothes feel softer.</p>
<p class="TXT">Use wool dryer balls, which soften clothes and reduce static without using chemicals except for the wool’s natural lanolin. Make sure they’re unscented, though, or you’ll wind up with the same fake fragrance used in the sheets.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Convenience: Furniture</p>
<p class="TXF">You sit on it, lie on it, sleep on it, and what would Netflix (watching my amazing series, <span class="ital">Down to Earth</span>, hopefully) and chill be without it? Its sole purpose is to make you feel so comfortable you never want to move. Does the fact that it may be emitting toxic fumes and carcinogenic dust all over you make a difference?</p>
<p class="TXT">Once, furniture was made in traditional ways with old-fashioned materials: solid wooden frames held together with nails, screws, and glue; cushions filled with down or natural fibers and covered with cotton, horsehair, velvet, canvas, or wool. It was solid as hell and built to last. People once bequeathed their furniture to their descendants. At some <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page193" title="193"/>point all that began to change, with furniture being manufactured with synthetic petroleum-based fibers, plastics, and composite “wood,” all treated with chemicals never before found in our homes. Manufacturing processes changed, prices came down, but so did safety.</p>
<p class="TXT">One of the biggest problems with furniture came with an attempt to make it safer: the nearly universal use of flame-retardant fabric treatments. It sounded like such a great idea that California actually required its use, and so, to make life simpler, manufacturers began using it on all their sofas and chairs to be sold anywhere in the country. It was also widely used in other products, including mattresses.</p>
<p class="TXT">As happens so often with added “benefits,” it didn’t go exactly as planned. The chemical group is called <span class="ital">chlorinated alkyl phosphates</span>; these include tris(1,3-dichloro-2-propyl)phosphate, or TDCIPP, and other similar substances. They can be carcinogenic. They can disrupt the endocrine system. And they have been found to damage nerve cells and nervous systems. Some blood tests have showed scary levels of the chemicals, particularly in kids, possibly due to the fact that they often play either on living room furniture or on the floor nearby, where dust settles. All that came about so we could protect people who might fall asleep on a sofa while smoking. It was a nice goal, no doubt, but one that came at a steep price.</p>
<p class="TXT">Finally, California wised up and decided to end the requirement that furniture be treated with flame retardants. Can you guess what happened next? The companies that made and sold those chemicals sued the state, claiming to be looking out for the safety of consumers, who might otherwise burn up in fires. Once again, industry showed its true colors even in the face of clear danger to the rest of us. The ultimate irony is that the chemicals weren’t really much good at fighting the spread of flames. Today, many furniture makers have curtailed their use of flame retardants—but not all.</p>
<p class="TXT">Most furniture today is made with polyurethane foam padding instead of natural materials. Polyfoam is lightweight, durable, flexible, and supportive. It’s also cheap. These are all positives, you could argue. But <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page194" title="194"/>polyfoam is made from petroleum, which should immediately set off alarms. It’s also made using toluene diisocyanate (TDI), which the US National Toxicology Program has classified as “reasonably to be anticipated as a human carcinogen.” If that’s not bad enough, polyfoam is what is treated with the flame-retardant chemicals.</p>
<p class="TXT">Manufactured wood products, meaning particleboard and other types of “formed” wood, are treated with formaldehyde. This is considered to be cancer causing for people who work with the chemical and are exposed to higher levels than we find in our homes. But again, we’re not just breathing in one particular gas; we’re under attack by many other carcinogenic chemicals, too. So why subject ourselves to one more?</p>
<p class="TXT">Finally, the “forever chemicals” that make fabric stain resistant also make upholstery hazardous to our health. I’ve already discussed these chemicals, since they’re contained in clothing, cosmetics, and other consumer goods. They’re yet another convenience that’s anything but.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Considering that polyfoam and synthetic fabrics are nonbiodegradable, the disposable furniture we buy today will languish in landfills, where it will outlive us by several centuries. I’ve already discussed what happens when all those chemicals and petroleum-based products are discarded, so no there’s need to cover it again. It’s grim.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">The current system of blindly buying furniture and everything else in our homes—no matter how toxic they are—must change. That will happen only when we demand better products. Meanwhile, buy used/vintage furniture, preferably made in the old-school way from natural materials. Even if you’re buying new furniture, the same rules apply. I realize that it may be more expensive than things made from the hazardous materials <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page195" title="195"/>I’ve discussed. But chances are that it will last a lot longer and without the possibility of making you and your family sick.</p>
<p class="TXT">When upholstery gets worn out, reupholster the piece. If a wood frame begins to break down, take the furniture to a furniture restorer. They still exist, believe it or not, throwbacks to the days when people had things such as appliances and shoes repaired. That was possible only for well-made possessions, of course, but that way you could use your sofa or easy chair (or shoes!) for decades instead of a couple of years.</p>
<p class="TXT">If that doesn’t work for you, seek out furniture made with solid wood rather than composites or plywood. Look for Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) certification, proof that it came from responsibly managed forests. If that’s impossible, look for furniture with lower formaldehyde gas emission labels such as “exterior grade” pressed wood, California Air Resources Board (CARB) Phase 2 Compliant, ultra-low-emitting formaldehyde (ULEF), or no added formaldehyde (NAF).</p>
<p class="TXT">Air out new furniture if you think it was made using formaldehyde, preferably outdoors or in a well-ventilated area. You can even ask the manufacturer to leave the furniture unsealed in the warehouse for a few days before it’s delivered to your home.</p>
<p class="TXT">You can apply latex-based paint or formaldehyde-free varnish to formaldehyde-containing furniture to create a surface barrier.</p>
<p class="TXT">Thanks to new fire safety standards in California, many furniture manufacturers across the country now produce sofas and other upholstered furniture without flame-retardant chemicals. Read the label carefully. If you must smoke, do so carefully.</p>
<p class="TXT">And instead of needing stain-resistant upholstery, try being careful with your furniture. Don’t let the kids eat on your sofa, and maybe you shouldn’t be eating there, either. If that’s not possible, buy furniture with upholstery you can wash.</p>
<p class="H1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page196" title="196"/>Fatal Convenience: Nonstick Cookware</p>
<p class="TXF">It was one of those labor-saving modern household miracles back in the 1960s: a new product that would make cooking and cleanup easier than homemakers dreamed possible. What could go wrong? Teflon became such a large part of American life that soon it was an adjective, used to describe someone who could slide through shady moments without any bad stuff sticking. Ronald Reagan was called “the Teflon president.” A gangster who evaded prison (for a while) was known as a “Teflon Don.”</p>
<p class="TXT">In 1938, a scientist working for DuPont was trying to develop a refrigerant gas. Instead, a happy accident in the lab produced a white powder with no apparent benefits except that it was slippery. A large number of industrial applications were soon found, but it wasn’t until 1954 that a French engineer’s wife suggested that he try to bond the chemical, called polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), to cooking surfaces. Voilà! nonstick pans were born. In 1960, the FDA approved the use of the chemical for food-related purposes, and Teflon took off.</p>
<p class="TXT">It was a nice little story—until somebody realized that those pans also contained PFOA, one of the “forever chemicals,” and that if it got into the food, it was probably exposing people to a long list of health hazards, cancer among them. Now, if those pans were never scratched, they might have been safe, but that’s not how things work in the real world. Every little chip or ding of the cooking surface pretty much guaranteed that you’d be eating nonstick chemicals along with your dinner, without ever knowing.</p>
<p class="TXT">So since 2015, PFOAs in cookware have been replaced by other chemicals from the same family, ones that have not been proven to be dangerous. Of course, that doesn’t necessarily mean they’re safe. Some nonstick pans now advertise themselves as PFOA free, but PFOA and PTFE are just two of the thousands of polyfluoroalkyl substances used in consumer products, and manufacturers don’t have to disclose their use because it is considered to be a trade secret.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page197" title="197"/>There’s a manufacturing technique called GenX that claims to make nonstick chemicals safely, without PFOAs. But the EPA’s assessment shows that even small doses of GenX chemicals could present serious health risks, including harm to prenatal development, as well as the immune system, liver, kidneys, and thyroid.</p>
<p class="TXT">So we come back around to the same questions that hang over the rest of this book: Is the convenience worth the cost? Is the reward worth the risk? By now you know my answer: no way! People cooked their food—<span class="ital">safely</span>—long before Teflon came along.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">As I’ve stated more than once, the PFAS chemicals found in Teflon pollute water and don’t break down easily—in fact, they’re termed <span class="ital">persistent</span>, meaning that they remain in the environment (and us) for decades. Nearly every American tested has them in his or her blood. They didn’t necessarily absorb it from nonstick cookware. It’s in so many consumer products that it could have come from anywhere, including tap water.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">To be safest, don’t use nonstick surface cookware. There are great alternatives. Ceramic nonstick pots and pans are coated with silica manufactured using a process that creates a nontoxic nonstick surface. The only downside is that the coating lasts only one to three years before losing its slipperiness. Cast-iron pans are a great choice, and they can actually improve your health since some of the iron makes its way into the food. They are inexpensive, and with proper care, they can be passed down for generations. You can put cast-iron pans into the oven, too, so they’re versatile. You can also use stainless-steel cookware, which heats evenly and lasts a long time. It’s what pro cooks use.</p>
<p class="TXT">But how will you keep the food from sticking? The same way people have done for centuries: by using a little oil or water. If something sticks <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page198" title="198"/>while cooking, you can unstick it by adding water and stirring the food to loosen the sticky parts. It takes but a few moments of time. In any case, you’ll figure it out.</p>
<p class="TXT">If you must keep using pans with nonstick surfaces:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Make sure they were manufactured after 2015, when PFAOs were forbidden.</li>
<li>Make sure they were made in the United States, since some foreign countries still allow PFAOs to be used.</li>
<li>Wash cookware gently with soap and water, and don’t use metal utensils when cooking. If a pan gets chipped or scratched, toss it.</li>
<li>Don’t heat a dry pan to the point where it begins to smoke, because the fumes it emits are a health hazard. In fact, here’s what the official Teflon website has to say: “Avoid preheating nonstick pans on high heat without food in them—always start at a lower temperature using a fat like oil or butter or with the food already included. Empty pots and pans reach high temperatures very quickly, and when heated accidentally over 348 °C (660 °F) the coating can begin to deteriorate. . . . Do not use nonstick cookware and bakeware in ovens hotter than 260 °C (500 °F).”</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">Wow, even nonstick cookware needs to be greased with oil or fat. So what’s the point of using it?</p>
<p class="TXT">One final piece of advice: Replace nonstick cookware every few years. Or just skip using it altogether.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Air Fresheners</p>
<p class="TXF">In the previous chapters, I talked a lot about the power of fragrance—how our brains are hard-wired to be disgusted by bad odors and mesmerized by good ones. For just about every species, the sense of smell is essential to survival. No wonder we can’t help ourselves. Given that, are you surprised to learn that we in the United States spend somewhere in <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page199" title="199"/>the neighborhood of $2 billion a year on products intended to make the air we inhale smell sweeter?</p>
<p class="TXT">Are you shocked to find out that many of these products are harmful to our health? (Probably not at this point.) It makes sense that if we add a long list of toxic man-made chemicals to air that travels through our noses and into our lungs, we’re asking for trouble. Yet that’s exactly what we’re doing when we spray air freshener into a room.</p>
<p class="TXT">There’s an amazing (or, depending on your point of view, crazy) array of products we use to perfume the air—sprays, gels, oils, liquids, solids, plug-ins, hanging disks, beads, potpourri, wick diffusers, scented candles; in active or passive forms; and with instant, intermittent, or continuous release. You can also go crazy and connect a fragrance diffuser to your home heating, ventilation, or air-conditioning system.</p>
<p class="TXT">Air fresheners work in several ways. One is to capture the stinky molecules using something like cyclodextrin, a ring of starch derived from corn and potatoes that traps odors and locks them away, making them undetectable. These have lots of industrial uses as well. Odors can also be neutralized with citric acid, which regulates a smelly substance’s pH.</p>
<p class="TXT">In 1952, a passive air freshener was created when a dairy truck driver in upstate New York complained to the inventor Julius Sämann about the smell of spilled milk. To address the issue, Julius added pleasing fragrances to blotter material, inventing the first car air freshener. In honor of his years extracting aromatic oils in Canada’s pine forests, he gave it the shape of an evergreen tree.</p>
<p class="TXT">But when we think of air fresheners, we usually mean the big brands that simply mask strong scents by covering them up with even stronger scents. We all want our homes to smell like a pine forest, a grove of citrus trees, or freshly mown grass. Of course, it’s too costly to make products using natural ingredients, so the smells are manufactured in industrial labs using synthesized chemicals. That’s the convenience.</p>
<p class="TXT">Naturally, there’s a price to pay. Those sweet-smelling chemicals are now floating in a cloud all around you: on your skin, in your eyes, and, as I’ve already mentioned, infiltrating your respiratory system. Exposure <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page200" title="200"/>to synthetic air fresheners, even at low levels, has been associated with a range of adverse health effects, including migraine headaches, asthma attacks, breathing difficulties, dermatitis, infant diarrhea and earaches, neurological problems, and ventricular fibrillation.</p>
<p class="TXT">In 2007, the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) published a paper showing that many air fresheners contain the hazardous chemicals phthalates, known to cause hormonal abnormalities, birth defects, and reproductive problems. Since then, some companies—but not all—have stopped using phthalates.</p>
<p class="TXT">Researchers at the University of California, Berkeley, performed a study on air fresheners and household cleaners and discovered ethylene-based glycol ethers, classified by the EPA as hazardous pollutants. It also found the presence of terpenes, chemicals often derived from citrus oils that are not inherently dangerous except that they react with ozone in the air to form formaldehyde, which <span class="ital">is</span> toxic.</p>
<p class="TXT">In fairness, the study reported that health issues apply mostly to professional cleaners who are exposed to high levels of these products. But as always, we have no idea how these chemicals react with all the other junk we inhale in the course of a normal day. So why subject ourselves to any more pollutants than we already do?</p>
<p class="TXT">A chemical called 1,4-dichlorobenzene, which even moths are smart enough to avoid—it’s present in mothballs—can also be found in some air fresheners. The EPA’s air quality guide lists it as toxic since its vapors can affect respiratory function. The National Institute of Health Sciences has also reported that the chemicals in air fresheners can reduce lung capacity and may hasten respiratory diseases.</p>
<p class="TXT">A University of Washington study found that eight unnamed, widely used air fresheners manufactured in the United States released an average of eighteen chemicals into the air. On average, one in five of the chemicals was a hazardous substance highlighted in federal and some state pollution standards. Half of the air fresheners tested released acetaldehyde, a likely human carcinogen according to the EPA.</p>
<p class="TXT">Another University of Washington study of chemical hypersensitivity <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page201" title="201"/>reported that around a third of participants who had asthma said that air fresheners aggravate their condition, and 40 percent reacted negatively to scented products in general.</p>
<p class="TXT">Finally, as part of a 2009 study of cleaning supplies used in California schools, a total of eighty-nine airborne contaminants were detected, including acetaldehyde.</p>
<p class="TXT">Included among the individual toxic chemicals in some of the most popular big-brand air fresheners are: cyclodextrin (can damage vision); dialkyl sulfosuccinates (can have reproductive system effects and cause skin allergies); sodium polyacrylate (is toxic to aquatic life, can cause respiratory damage); sodium sorbate (may reduce fertility); sodium borate (ditto); plus propane, isobutane, and the list goes on.</p>
<p class="TXT">If you knew you were inhaling all those scary substances into your lungs, would you have been so hell-bent on perfuming the air you breathe? Do you believe that those chemical cocktails actually make your air <span class="ital">fresh</span>?</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Just consider all the plastic spray bottles and cans being wasted on fairly useless products intended only to perfume (and pollute) the air we breathe. It’s much wiser to eliminate the sources of bad smells than to poison ourselves trying to mask them.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">There are literally dozens of healthy, inexpensive do-it-yourself ways to rid your home of unpleasant smells and filling it with beautiful ones. They are listed in <a href="../Text/CH010.xhtml"><span class="blue">chapter 10</span></a>, but here are a few good ideas.</p>
<p class="TXT">Open some windows and turn on a fan or two. Or run the air conditioner. Maybe all you need to do is let some of the outdoors indoors and vice versa.</p>
<p class="TXT">Fill a few containers with baking soda, which absorbs odors safely, and place them around your home.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page202" title="202"/>Decorate with flowers, which can perfume any space. Plants are nice, too, but even though they recycle the air, you’d need a whole lot of them to make a difference in smells.</p>
<p class="TXT">Fill a spray bottle with witch hazel, distilled water, and the essential oil of your choice and use it as an all-natural air freshener.</p>
<p class="TXT">Buy or make a reed diffuser, fill it with a natural oil or other nontoxic fragrance.</p>
<p class="TXT">Carbon and zeolite (a mineral) are used separately or together in filters for water, like in aquariums, but also to absorb bad air. Zeolite is especially effective against ammonia smells (think of your cat’s litter box). Both of these are easily available online.</p>
<p class="TXT">If you’re really serious about smells, get an air purifier with a HEPA filter, which will remove allergens along with odors.</p>
<p class="TXT">If you must use a commercial air freshener, buy one that discloses every ingredient, including whatever it uses for fragrance. And of course, make sure it does <span class="ital">not</span> contain any of the toxic chemicals we’ve just finished discussing.</p>
<p class="TXT">On its website, the Environmental Working Group gives air fresheners letter grades from A to F that make it easy to find one that will do the job without making you and your family sick.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Plastic Food Storage Containers</p>
<p class="TXF">In theory, using food storage containers is a great idea. It probably means that you’ve cooked rather than ordered in, which is automatically an improvement in your nutritional health. If you’re storing leftovers, it means that you’re not wasting food, which is an enormous problem today. So far, so good. But what kind of containers are you using? If they’re plastic, that’s not so good.</p>
<p class="TXT">I probably don’t need to tell you what a chemist named Earl Tupper invented and began selling back in 1942. He used polyethylene slag, a <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page203" title="203"/>smelly black waste product of oil refining, and turned it into plastic containers that he called “Welcome Ware.” Later in the decade he added lids with a patented seal that closed with a “burp” to create a vacuum. With that innovation, Tupperware was born. It came along just as American homes began to have refrigerators large enough to store lots of food, making it possible for busy families to visit grocers weekly instead of daily.</p>
<p class="TXT">Even before then, the first man-made plasticlike material was unveiled at the Second International Industrial Exhibition in London in 1862. It was derived from cellulose and was therefore plant based and biodegradable. It could be molded when heated and retained its shape when cooled. Too bad it didn’t catch on.</p>
<p class="TXT">The main health hazard of plastic food containers comes from what happens when they’re heated. That’s because heat releases the dangerous components of a toxic, hazardous, possibly hormone-disrupting chemical called bisphenol A, or BPA.</p>
<p class="TXT">BPA is found in hardened plastic, meaning in water bottles, toys, and every kind of container, including the kind we use to store food and beverages. It’s even in thermal paper receipts. Its molecules are held together by what’s known to scientists as an ester bond, which is extremely sensitive to heat. When its temperature rises, the bonds break and the chemicals are unleashed. A survey by the CDC of 2,517 people estimated that more than 90 percent of Americans have detectable levels of BPA in their urine.</p>
<p class="TXT">In 2018, the American Academy of Pediatrics expressed concern about scientific evidence showing that when bisphenols contaminate our food, they may interfere with hormones in ways that can affect children’s long-term growth and development. BPA actually mimics estrogen and has been linked to reduced fertility in men and women, delayed puberty in girls, earlier puberty in boys, and behavioral problems in children.</p>
<p class="TXT">In the same year, scientists at the University of California, San Francisco, found dozens of chemicals called environmental organic acids, or EOAs, in the blood of pregnant women. These chemicals, which include bisphenol A, have structures similar to that of hormones, meaning <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page204" title="204"/>they may disrupt the endocrine system of a fetus and interfere with its development. Researchers involved in the study, which was published in the journal <span class="ital">Environmental Health Perspectives</span>, said that some of the chemicals had never before been documented in the blood of pregnant women, including two that are linked to genetic defects, fetal damage, and cancer. Among other chemicals detected was an estrogenic compound used in food-related plastic products, plastic pipes, and water bottles.</p>
<p class="TXT">According to the Mayo Clinic, “Exposure to BPA is a concern because of the possible health effects on the brain and prostate gland of fetuses, infants and children. It can also affect children’s behavior. Additional research suggests a possible link between BPA and increased blood pressure, type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease.”</p>
<p class="TXT">The evidence against BPA has been piling up over the past three decades. The EWG says that exposure to BPA may result in brain, behavioral, learning, and memory impairment, cardiovascular abnormalities, diabetes, obesity, breast and prostate cancer, thyroid and sex hormone disruption, early puberty, and changes to egg and sperm development and fertility. There’s scary stuff in all that nice Tupperware, don’t you think?</p>
<p class="TXT">But even ridding products of BPA won’t guarantee their safety. Research suggests that bisphenol S (BPS) and bisphenol F (BPF), the most common replacements, might have similar effects on the body. They are associated with obesity, particularly in children. According to a <span class="ital">Scientific American</span> article from 2014, “Nearly 81 percent of Americans have detectable levels of BPS in their urine. And once it enters the body it can affect cells in ways that parallel BPA.” A 2013 study by researchers at the University of Texas found that even concentrations of less than one part per trillion of BPS can disrupt cells’ normal functioning.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Look at it this way—single-use plastic, such as packaging and water bottles, is the scourge of our planet. Therefore, plastic that we reuse over and over has to be an improvement. And it is, except for the fact that at some <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page205" title="205"/>point it will wear out and we’ll toss it into the recycling bin, when it will join all the rest of the plastic junking up the world. In the end there’s no kind of plastic that doesn’t do long-term harm, these containers included. It’s all toxic junk.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">You should use storage containers made of silicon rubber, stainless steel, glass, wood, ceramic, porcelain, or pretty much anything other than plastic. These are also safe if you reheat food in a microwave oven (except for metal containers, obviously), though you might want to reconsider that habit, too. Cutting as much plastic as possible from our lives is the safest way to go. Barring that:</p>
<p class="TXT">Never heat anything in plastic.</p>
<p class="TXT">Don’t put plastic containers in your dishwasher, due to the high heat of the water in there.</p>
<p class="TXT">Make sure food is cool before you store it in plastic.</p>
<p class="TXT">Some families store pumped breast milk and baby formula in plastic containers—definitely a very bad idea!</p>
<p class="TXT">Don’t keep anything in plastic longer than necessary. The more time your food spends in contact with it, the greater the risk of contamination.</p>
<p class="TXT">The smaller the container, the more of your food will be touching a plastic surface, so bigger is better.</p>
<p class="TXT">Before you buy a plastic food storage container, check the bottom and avoid any with the recycling code 3, 6, or 7. They may contain phthalates, styrene, and bisphenols, unless they are labeled “biobased” or “greenware,” indicating that they’re made from corn and do not contain bisphenols.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Convenience: Aluminum Foil, Cookware, and Cans</p>
<p class="TXF">Aluminum is the most abundant metal in the earth’s crust, which explains the fact that it winds up in nearly all our food, water, soil, and air. Is <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page206" title="206"/>it any surprise that your body contains some, too? The average American takes in around eight milligrams of aluminum every day, mostly through eating and drinking. How dangerous can it be? Give me a minute, and I’ll get to that.</p>
<p class="TXT">Going back to the Wright brothers, aluminum has been necessary to aviation; it’s the only construction material sturdy enough but light enough to fly. Once somebody figured out how to roll the metal into thin sheets, it began to be used for wrapping fancy Swiss chocolates, chewing gum, mints, and other commercial products.</p>
<p class="TXT">The first home use of aluminum foil began in the 1920s, but then, during World War II, people were encouraged to turn in their aluminum cookware and anything else made of aluminum, even foil from cigarette packs, to be recycled into war materials, as recycling the metal was cheaper than mining new supplies. Today, the global sales of aluminum foil total more than $24 billion—a lot of wrapping going on, mostly of edibles. It’s really handy stuff, for both cooking as well as storing, and it looks pretty, too. That’s where the nice part ends.</p>
<p class="TXT">Since the 1960s, scientists have debated what they call “the aluminum hypothesis”—the possibility that aluminum found in the brain contributes to the development and progress of dementia. According to a 2011 paper published in the <span class="ital">International Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease</span>, “it is widely accepted that Al [aluminum] is a recognized neurotoxin, and that it could cause cognitive deficiency and dementia when it enters the brain.” So even though there’s still no ironclad proof, there’s definitely evidence of a link between metals and several brain diseases, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease), dementia, and Parkinson’s disease. As a neurotoxin, aluminum may slow the growth of brain cells—not a good thing. Those aren’t the only potential hazards; it’s also been linked to dialysis encephalopathy, bone disorders, and breast cancer.</p>
<p class="TXT">Knowing all that, do you think that cutting back on your aluminum intake might be a good idea? Makes sense to me. Why take an unnecessary chance with the only brain you’re ever going to get?</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page207" title="207"/>Our biggest exposure, beyond the environment, takes place in our kitchens. Research shows that food baked in aluminum foil contains more of the metal than when other kinds of cookware are used. If we’re making foods high in acidity, such as tomato sauce, even more of it leaches into what we’re about to eat. Salt also corrodes aluminum, meaning that there will be more metal in our meal. Still planning to barbecue using aluminum foil? <span class="ital">No bueno!</span></p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Aluminum production is responsible for about 1.1 billion tons of CO<sub>2</sub> emissions per year, or roughly 2 percent of global emissions. But recycling cans and other objects uses only 5 percent as much energy. So recycling aluminum containers is better environmentally than owning any. But we’re probably better off neither owning <span class="ital">nor</span> using new aluminum products.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">It’s impossible to avoid ingesting aluminum no matter what we try. But we can make a dent in the amount. Here are some tips for doing so.</p>
<p class="TXT">Never cook, roast, bake, or steam anything in aluminum foil. I know, using foil makes cleanup easier, but this is a great example of a convenience that’s not worth the cost. Lots of cooks wrap food in parchment paper before baking. Give that a try, but make sure you don’t start an oven fire.</p>
<p class="TXT">Don’t use aluminum cookware if you can help it. If you must, make sure that the label says that it’s either anodized or coated. Anodized means that it’s been hardened through a process that renders the metal nonreactive. Coated means that it’s been clad in stainless steel or ceramic, so the metal itself doesn’t touch your food. If the pan is neither anodized nor coated, you and your family are having a side dish of aluminum along with whatever else you’re eating.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page208" title="208"/>Needless to say, drinking out of aluminum cans also seems like a bad idea, not to mention the fact that it’s rare to find a healthy beverage that is sold in cans (even though beer <span class="ital">is</span> a plant-based product).</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Beds and Bedding</p>
<p class="TXF">We spend around a third of our lives lying in bed, totally out of it, completely vulnerable, believing that at least during those precious hours we’re safe from harm. Sweet dreams.</p>
<p class="TXT">Experts keep reminding us how important it is to our mental and physical health to get plenty of high-quality sleep. It regulates our blood sugar, reduces stress, enhances our immune system, and provides a long list of other benefits. The reality is that your face is buried in a pillow made of synthetic materials you probably haven’t bothered to research, and the rest of you is nestled in sheets, blankets, and comforters containing man-made fibers and fabrics just as unknown to you—and I’m guessing not as safe as you might imagine.</p>
<p class="TXT">Early beds, from the dawn of humankind until some point in the twentieth century, were made of natural materials, because that was all that existed: straw, wood, bamboo, reeds, wool, animal skins, feathers, cotton, linen. Whether they were organic or not wasn’t a consideration because there was no widespread use of pesticides. Often, sheets were woven on looms at home.</p>
<p class="TXT">Bedding today is a whole other thing. Your mattress contains lots of substances you’re not aware of, including dust and the tiny bugs—dust mites—that feed on it, plus your discarded dead skin and hair cells, plus various assorted fungi, and so on. That’s slightly disgusting to think about, though not lethal.</p>
<p class="TXT">But your bedding was probably manufactured and treated with a long list of industrial chemicals and nonnatural substances. A main reason is cost; synthetic fibers are cheaper to make than plant-based ones are to grow, harvest, and process. Then there are the superpowers that I <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page209" title="209"/>mentioned in the chapter on clothing: material that never wrinkles, never stains, never burns, and may even be able to resist bacteria.</p>
<p class="TXT">As helpful as all those features sound, each brings negatives, which usually outweigh the positives. I’ve already talked about the flame-retardant scam in the entry on furniture, but to recap: these are dangerous chemicals that off-gas into our lungs and have been linked to everything from cancer and endocrine-system disruption to allergies. Plus, they’re not really much good at fighting fires. Even with all that, for a while government agencies were forcing manufacturers of mattresses and furniture to treat their products with this junk. If you’ve ever bought a new mattress and noticed that odd, unnatural “new bed” smell, you were inhaling flame-retardant gas.</p>
<p class="TXT">Your pillows are probably not any safer. Most nowadays are made with synthetic materials, small plastic beads or polyester, including a chemical called ethylene glycol. It can cause allergic reactions, skin irritation, nausea, and respiratory depression. Memory foam pillows are made from polyurethane, which shows up in most furniture, too. It off-gasses volatile organic compounds (VOCs) that we breathe into our noses and lungs. Our kids and pets inhale them, too.</p>
<p class="TXT">Formaldehyde, benzidine, parathion, and mercury are all part of the manufacturing process of the cotton used in sheets and bedding and can potentially remain part of the fabric.</p>
<p class="TXT">Blended-fabric sheets and other bedding—meaning cotton-polyester mixtures—are still partly petroleum based, with all the toxicity that comes with that. And the cotton for standard-issue sheets was grown using pesticides, meaning that they’re harmful to the environment and not so great for you, either.</p>
<p class="TXT">Wrinkle-free sheets have the same dangers as no-iron clothing does. The resins used in their manufacture contain formaldehyde, which can cause dermatitis, throat irritation, and nausea. But that’s not all; in 1987, the EPA classified formaldehyde as a probable human carcinogen. Then, in 2011, the National Toxicology Program stepped that up, calling it <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page210" title="210"/>a known human carcinogen. It’s better to live with wrinkled sheets (or learn to iron).</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Bedding fabrics create the same problems as do all the fabrics I’ve discussed in this book. Nonorganic cotton comes with a huge environmental cost, from the water needed to grow and process it to pesticides and GMOs to chemical treatments to the nonbiodegradable polyester content. Discarded mattresses, blankets, pillows, and sheets pile up in landfills somewhere, poisoning the earth, which in turn contaminates the water below.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">Choose sheets, blankets, comforters, and pillows made using natural fibers only, meaning organic cotton, linen, silk, and wool. Even some offbeat materials such as kapok, buckwheat, millet, and other plant-based fibers are now being used. Not only are these safer to have against your face and body, but they breathe, so your skin can, too. And they’ll wick away moisture better than synthetic fibers do. The downside is that they’re more expensive than the other kinds. Organic cotton sheets can cost double or even triple the conventional ones. But what you spend today will benefit your health for years to come. Avoid blended materials such as cotton or silk mixed with polyester and other synthetics—even satin sheets, sorry to tell you adventurous sleepers. As with clothing, don’t buy bedding with wrinkle-free, antistatic, or any other superpowers.</p>
<p class="TXT">Today, shopping for mattresses is more complicated than ever due to all the choices and the confusing terminology. Our best bet, as always, is to stick with natural materials, such as organic cotton and organic wool. If you’re really worried about your bed going up in flames, either stop smoking there or invest in a mattress made of wool, which is <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page211" title="211"/>naturally fire resistant. Be wary of something called a fire sock, which is a flame-resistant covering made of fiberglass or other synthetic materials.</p>
<p class="TXT">Look for bedding with a Global Organic Textile Standard (GOTS) label. This certification means that at least 70 percent of the fibers are organic and that ethical treatment of workers and environmentally friendly manufacturing standards are in place.</p>
</body>
</html>