<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Fatal Conveniences</title>
  <link href="../Styles/FatalConveniences.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1096cf69-c1c2-4b94-ac1d-5d952fe64055" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<p class="CN"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH002"><span class="blue"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page22" title="22"/>2</span></a></p>
<p class="CT"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH002"><span class="blue">This Is the Chapter About My Dad</span></a></p>
<p class="TXFF"><span class="boldsc">THE SUBJECT OF <span class="boldital">FATAL CONVENIENCES</span> MEANS</span> a lot to me, even beyond the obvious reason of wanting everybody to be safe and healthy. It’s a story.</p>
<p class="TXT">Back in the 1990s, when I was in college, my father started experiencing something weird. He was a university professor, an intellectual guy with a lot of empathy. Most of his life revolved around his intelligence and his ability to learn, reason, and teach. Suddenly he began having foggy mental episodes, when he couldn’t think straight or focus. He felt as though he was losing it, and he didn’t know why.</p>
<p class="TXT">He went to physicians and even to a psychiatrist, but no one could explain what was happening. Finally, he was told he might have a “chemical sensitivity disorder,” which they barely understood and didn’t know how to treat. The experts believed that for some mysterious reason his neurological system had become incapable of handling the everyday substances in his surroundings—the same ones the rest of us dealt with without even noticing.</p>
<p class="TXT">That caused a pretty dramatic change in his life. It was a kind of torture, really. It forced him to isolate himself from the rest of the world. He had to avoid situations where he might be near people who used any kind of personal care product that contained a fragrance—meaning soap, shampoo, deodorant, lotion, perfume. Oh, laundry detergent, too. It also <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page23" title="23"/>meant that he had to stop using those things, so in the pre-Google era, he had to hunt for products that didn’t contain the widely used chemicals that were making his life such misery. Try to imagine what it would be like to live that way. Virtually impossible. But for him the alternative was even worse—it was as though his brain could no longer function.</p>
<p class="TXT">We didn’t know what to make of it, naturally. All of a sudden, our dad couldn’t be near us or anyone else? We all thought he was going crazy! He must have been in the grip of a mental disorder that he was blaming on invisible chemicals in the air. Who ever heard of such a thing? I was just a kid from Minnesota, and now my dad, who was a really smart guy, was telling us that the products we all used every day—the same things used by everybody else in the world—were harming him and, as far as we could tell, him alone.</p>
<p class="TXT">Because he was a professor, a man of science, he did tons of research and gave us photocopies of articles and scientific papers, stapling them and highlighting the important parts. He made us VHS copies of videos, too, since that was all pre-YouTube. And he was telling us, as a family, “Hey, these things are toxic. They trip me out. Don’t wear this stuff around me.” He would give us each a care package—he’d say, “Here’s the soap to use, here’s the shampoo, here’s the deodorant, here’s the toothpaste, here’s the whatever. And you can’t wear clothes that you just washed, because you didn’t use the right laundry detergent. And you can’t use cologne or aftershave or anything like that.” All those restrictions were like layers separating him from his family and the rest of the world. We knew he was suffering, and of course we wanted to hang out with him. But it wasn’t easy.</p>
<p class="TXT">At the same time, he was trying to maintain his career, switching from professor to counselor, though that still meant that he would have contact with other people. And the same issues came up. He had to send letters to everyone he knew, saying “Hey, listen, I have this thing, it’s called chemical sensitivity. These deodorants, these shampoos, these fragrances, they all fog me out, so could you please not wear them when you’re seeing me, and here are some alternatives.”</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page24" title="24"/>You can imagine how that went over. Nobody knew what he was talking about. It just drove him deeper into himself and away from everybody else. It was a downward spiral into isolation and depression.</p>
<p class="TXT">I have another memory of my dad, from when I was even younger—when I was a kid and he was telling me about his time in the US Navy. He had been part of a select group called “Keepers of the Dragon,” specialists who maintained and kept control of our nuclear bombs. He was aboard one of the aircraft carriers used to blockade Cuba during the 1962 missile crisis, when we nearly went to nuclear war with the Soviet Union. He had been exposed to radioactivity, which settles in the thyroid gland and can cause cancer. The only treatment was to swallow radioactive isotopes, which travel to the gland and actually destroy it.</p>
<p class="TXT">So that was what the doctors prescribed, and he was on thyroid medication for the rest of his life. Could that have been the cause of his chemical sensitivity? When you mess with the endocrine system, you mess with everything else in the body. Was that to blame? I’ll never know for sure. But I suspect that it had to have affected him.</p>
<p class="TXT">Eventually his disability forced him to retire from the university, which only deepened his isolation and made him more depressed. Even he began to wonder, “What’s <span class="ital">really</span> wrong with me? What is going on inside my head?” Doctors prescribed drugs they thought would bring back his ability to focus and lift some of the mental fog. None of it helped. Before long, my dad, who had suffered years before from alcohol addiction, was taking multiple prescription medications, Ritalin and others, more than any of his doctors knew. Then, after thirty years of being sober, he began drinking again. His chemical sensitivity issues had started him down a path where everything quickly went wrong.</p>
<p class="TXT">Eventually, he died of alcoholism. But that wasn’t what really killed him.</p>
<p class="TXF1"><span class="boldsc">SOMETHING UNEXPECTED CAME OUT OF</span> that sad time. Because of my dad, I had stopped using products with chemicals that triggered him. It was the only way we could spend time together. As a result, <span class="ital">I</span> became sensitive <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page25" title="25"/>to the same things that plagued him. Not in the extreme way he was affected—I could still think and focus just fine. But it was as though I had gone through chemical detox. Suddenly, I couldn’t stand being around people who used normal soaps and shampoos and lotions and so on. I was in my twenties at that point, in college, so you can imagine what it was like to go through life trying to avoid exposure to the common products everybody else used.</p>
<p class="TXT">But when I was near someone wearing perfume or aftershave, it was as though I had been punched in the face. I felt assaulted. As long as I continued using the products my dad had introduced me to, I felt great. Healthy. Clear-headed. To this day, if someone comes around me wearing anything with a strong fragrance, it feels intrusive—perfume, cologne, new-car smell, scented candles, most soaps, the same.</p>
<p class="TXT">That experience opened my eyes. If you saw any of the <span class="ital">Matrix</span> movies, you know the meaning of the red pill. The Keanu Reeves character is offered a choice: take the blue pill or the red pill. The blue pill will allow him to go on living in comfortable blindness to the reality of the world around him. If instead he takes the red pill, he will suddenly see the truth of his existence—that everything he thought was real was a lie, created to keep people from knowing that they’re living inside a simulated world manufactured by evil machines.</p>
<p class="TXT">He takes the red pill. Pow!</p>
<p class="TXT">That’s how it felt to me—like giving up all those products had opened my eyes to a shocking truth: that the most common conveniences, the ones we all used and enjoyed, were doing us harm. They contained chemical substances and other things that had been created in labs, and because those substances were invisible, we had no idea that we were being constantly bathed in them, twenty-four hours a day, for our entire lives.</p>
<p class="TXT">That’s <span class="ital">our</span> Matrix: the invisible fog of synthetic chemicals, electromagnetic radiation, petroleum by-products, microplastics, pesticides, hormone disruptors, and all the other harmful junk that surrounds us. Most of us inhabit it without ever suspecting a thing. We get sick and even die, and we never know why.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page26" title="26"/>That’s the world of Fatal Conveniences. We think we’re seeing reality. We believe that our homes, our food, our clothes, and all the products we buy and use to make our lives easier exist for our benefit, with no downside.</p>
<p class="TXT">Then, one day, we’re offered the red pill.</p>
<p class="TXT">Boom! Now we look around and see what was kept hidden from us all these years.</p>
<p class="TXT">Today, the rest of the world is just beginning to catch up with my father. We’re starting to realize how heavily we’re being dosed with all kinds of gnarly chemicals. We’re finally ready to face the truth.</p>
<p class="TXT">Fortunately, there is a whole new world of consumer products being made with our well-being and the health of our planet in mind. Every day I hear about new choices—in everything from skin care to clothing to household products to consumer electronics. We now have alternatives to the poisonous garbage out there. In these pages, once I expose all the conveniences that are doing us harm, I’m going to talk about the products that perform the same functions.</p>
<p class="TXT">But without killing us.</p>
</body>
</html>