<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Fatal Conveniences</title>
  <link href="../Styles/FatalConveniences.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1096cf69-c1c2-4b94-ac1d-5d952fe64055" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<p class="CN"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH006"><span class="blue"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page117" title="117"/>6</span></a></p>
<p class="CT"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH006"><span class="blue">Electromagnetic Radiation</span></a></p>
<p class="TXFF"><span class="boldsc">I’M ABOUT TO PROVE TO YOU</span> that your use of electronic devices—everything from your cell phone to your computer to your Wi-Fi modem and router and Bluetooth and Alexa and every wearable and so-called smart appliance you own—could be causing you physical harm that might result in serious illness and possibly even death.</p>
<p class="TXT">Okay, that’s not exactly true. (Though I can’t say for sure it’s completely false, either.) Here’s my point: If it <span class="ital">were</span> true, what would you do? Would you throw away all your electronic toys and tools and never touch one ever again? Especially since now you know that failing to do so would put you and your loved ones in terrible danger? Could you live without all that stuff? Would you even try?</p>
<p class="TXT">Once upon a time, twenty or thirty years ago, the trappings of the digital world were mere conveniences. They were brand-new, totally cool playthings. Today, I can safely say, while typing on a laptop connected to the internet, with my cell phone by my side, that they have become necessities. If we were all to check out of the connected world tomorrow, the global disruption would be catastrophic. It would be as if the planet had suddenly been hurtled back to the Stone Age, or at least to the twentieth century. How would we communicate? How could we share information? Where would we post cat videos?</p>
<p class="TXT">Compared to the other chapters, this is going to be a weird one.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page118" title="118"/>Throughout this book, I’ve been sounding the alarm on all kinds of dangers in the products we use every day. This chapter’s no different, but the dangers are.</p>
<p class="TXT">For one thing, they’re invisible. For another, they’re all around us whether we use them or not. And unlike the chemicals and other substances we’ve been discussing, when it comes to these Fatal Conveniences, we have no clear idea of which hazards we face, how serious they are, or what—if anything—we can do to make ourselves safer.</p>
<p class="TXT">We are living in an experiment.</p>
<p class="TXT">How does that make you feel? It scares me a lot. There’s plenty of reason to believe that simply being in the wireless, digital world exposes us to danger. For this, scientific proof definitely does exist. I’m talking about things such as increased risk of leukemia, brain tumors, cancer, and disruption of our reproductive systems. You might not be aware of all the research, but there are reasons for that. We haven’t produced nearly enough studies and scientific papers. There are reasons for that, too.</p>
<p class="TXT">Once you look beyond what little information we do have, the picture gets murky. Technology is advancing so fast that studies done today are outdated tomorrow. Uncovering the influence of invisible radiation and waves is a lot more challenging than determining the effects of chemicals on our bodies. It’s to nobody’s advantage (except yours and mine) to spend a fortune on credible top-shelf research into this subject.</p>
<p class="TXT">The government isn’t worried about how our health is affected by digital technology. That’s why the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulates all this stuff rather than the EPA, the CDC, or the FDA. So we’ve been lulled into a false sense of security. Then there’s the simple truth that if our electronics really <span class="ital">are</span> dangerous, we’d rather not know. Because then we’d have to take some actions that we truly do not want to take.</p>
<p class="TXT">Once I began working on this chapter, I realized it could easily be a book all on its own. Still, I’m going to try to tell you some things I think you should know.</p>
<p class="TXT">The first thing to know is that we ourselves run on electricity. Our <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page119" title="119"/>hearts operate on electrical impulses, and when something goes wrong with the beating mechanism, doctors implant a battery-operated device into our chest to fix the problem. Electrolytes are the minerals such as sodium, potassium, and others containing electrical charges that regulate our cellular activity and keep us alive. Our brains run on electricity.</p>
<p class="TXT">Long before Ben Franklin flew his kite, or Thomas Edison screwed in a light bulb, or Elon Musk made electric cars cool, electricity played a major role in human existence. We contain it.</p>
<p class="TXT">But once it began to exist outside our bodies, our relationship started to change. Today, our lives have been completely transformed by electrical conveniences. They gave us light, gave us heat, allowed us to use the hours after dark as we please: to work, to play, to live. We disconnected ourselves from the rhythms imposed by sunlight and seasons, but it felt good.</p>
<p class="TXT">As conveniences go, electricity and everything it has made possible have been amazing. Nobody sane would want to go without.</p>
<p class="TXT">But along the way, we created an invisible electrical storm that surrounds us twenty-four hours a day. It’s inescapable. It messes up our innate circadian rhythms and affects everything from our sleep patterns to our immune systems to our cellular repair processes.</p>
<p class="TXT">Part of what makes this topic so hard to understand is all the technical jargon, so let’s take care of that now. Start with electromagnetic radiation, or EMR. All your wireless devices create EMR. So does your microwave oven. So does your TV. So does the wiring in your home. EMF is short for electromagnetic field, which means the EMR that surrounds us and has done so since time began. Planet Earth itself creates an EMF. It’s why the needle on a compass points north. Everything from electrical power generator lines to your hair dryer creates fields of electromagnetic energy.</p>
<p class="TXT">There are two basic types of EMR: ionizing and nonionizing. The ionizing kind is powerful, strong enough to bust open atoms and send electrons flying. What makes this kind dangerous is its ability to penetrate deep into human bodies and alter our DNA and our cells. X-rays work because they’re ionizing, but that’s also why you wear a lead apron in <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page120" title="120"/>the dentist’s chair and why you have to be careful about getting too many body scans. Nuclear explosions are ionizing, too.</p>
<p class="TXT">The devices we use in our daily lives do not emit this kind of radiation—only the nonionizing, supposedly harmless kind. Most scientists say confidently that nonionizing radiation is safe because it’s too weak to penetrate deeply into our bodies and directly damage our DNA or our cells. We have to assume that they’re right.</p>
<p class="TXT">So what’s my problem? It’s that nobody has proven that over time, nonionizing radiation doesn’t <span class="ital">indirectly</span> damage our DNA and our cells and possibly cause some of the serious, even fatal conditions that I mentioned a few paragraphs ago.</p>
<p class="TXT">In fact, there’s a whole lot of evidence suggesting that electromagnetic radiation might indeed be dangerous in indirect ways that we don’t yet understand.</p>
<p class="TXT">The abstract of a paper published in 2017 in the journal <span class="ital">Environmental Pollution</span> by a prominent scientist named Magda Havas sums it up nicely:</p>
<p class="EXT">This paper attempts to resolve the debate about whether non-ionizing radiation (NIR) can cause cancer—a debate that has been ongoing for decades. The rationale, put forward mostly by physicists and accepted by many health agencies, is that, “<span class="ital">since NIR does not have enough energy to dislodge electrons, it is unable to cause cancer</span>.” This argument is based on a flawed assumption and uses the model of ionizing radiation (IR) to explain NIR, which is inappropriate. Evidence of free-radical damage has been repeatedly documented among humans, animals, plants and microorganisms for both extremely low frequency (ELF) electromagnetic fields (EMF) and for radio frequency (RF) radiation, neither of which is ionizing. While IR directly damages DNA, NIR interferes with the oxidative repair mechanisms resulting in oxidative stress, damage to cellular components including DNA, and damage to cellular processes leading to cancer. Furthermore, free-radical damage explains the increased cancer risks associated with mobile phone use, occupational <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page121" title="121"/>exposure to NIR (ELF EMF and RFR), and residential exposure to power lines and RF transmitters including mobile phones, cell phone base stations, broadcast antennas, and radar installations.</p>
<p class="TXT">Her paper cites a long list of studies that provide scientific reasons to keep asking the question that nags at me: Are we <span class="ital">really</span> sure that we’re not being harmed by the indirect effects of nonionizing radiation?</p>
<p class="TXT">And the answer is no. We’re not <span class="ital">really</span> sure. We just act like we are. Here’s what the World Health Organization has to say on the subject:</p>
<p class="EXT">Electromagnetic fields (EMF) occur in nature and have always been present on earth. However, during the 20th century, environmental exposure to man-made sources of EMF steadily increased due to electricity demand, ever-advancing wireless technologies and changes in work practices and social behaviour. Everyone is exposed to a complex mix of electric and magnetic fields at many different frequencies, at home and at work, and concern continues to grow over possible health effects from overexposure.</p>
<p class="TXT">So even a mainstream outfit like the World Health Organization acknowledges that “concern continues to grow over possible health effects from overexposure.”</p>
<p class="TXT">Here’s what I think: “overexposure” means that we’re getting more than is good for us. But as always happens when human health is up against business interests, human health comes in second. Every page of this book proves that. We’re never going to force the tech giants to fund research to find out for sure whether exposure to their products is harming us. Instead, we’re all going to have to live with it for years, decades, the rest of our lives, and then—maybe—we’ll find out whether it damaged our DNA or our reproductive system, if it caused our cancer, infertility, and other serious malfunctions.</p>
<p class="TXT">That’s how the world works today. It makes no sense to me, either.</p>
<p class="TXT">Technology advances in leaps and bounds, faster than any health <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page122" title="122"/>researchers can possibly move, which is partly why the science will never catch up. It’s like trying to hit a moving target. Tech companies want to innovate and disrupt, to make life easier, faster, and more frictionless than before. That’s how billion-dollar fortunes are born. We can’t trust those tech bros to carefully evaluate their innovations before they ship them out into the world.</p>
<p class="TXT">What was Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg’s motto? “Move fast and break things.”</p>
<p class="TXT">We’re not “things,” but the tech companies are breaking us just the same.</p>
<p class="TXT">And we are seemingly helpless to stop the next big leap forward, the latest tweak, the hottest tech that will revolutionize everyone’s life whether we want it to or not. We’re all trapped in a bad sci-fi movie.</p>
<p class="TXT">As is true everywhere else in the world of Fatal Conveniences, the hazards are especially risky for kids. Unlike adults, they were born into the digital age, meaning they’ve been exposed to EMR from birth (and even earlier). Their bodies are more vulnerable than ours. Their reproductive systems are the ones that need protection. But they’re not getting it.</p>
<p class="TXT">According to an Environmental Working Group analysis of existing research, radiation from wireless digital sources, including cell phones, can cause changes in sleep habits and increase the risk of dizziness, tremors, headaches, memory difficulties, and behavioral changes, especially in children. It may even be responsible for an increased risk of tumors in the brain and inner ear, including malignancies. There’s also evidence to suggest that EMR has serious effects on our nervous systems and our behaviors.</p>
<p class="TXT">Do you wonder why I’m so scared? And angry? How can we know all that and still go through life acting as though our digital devices are our friends?</p>
<p class="TXT">Meanwhile, we are sprinting toward ever more electrification. Toward more and more data being transferred wirelessly. Toward more radiation spewing everywhere.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page123" title="123"/>This all reminds me of what we went through with cigarettes. Look back now at our attitudes about smoking in the 1940s, ’50s, ’60s, and ’70s. We thought that smokers were so cool and glamorous.</p>
<p class="TXT">Smoking kills slowly, over the course of decades. The damage is cumulative. Is radiation—even the nonionizing kind—operating the same way? We can’t possibly know, because the technology hasn’t been around long enough for us to measure its long-term effects.</p>
<p class="TXT">Is buying your kid a cell phone, an Apple Watch, or a laptop computer the same thing as giving him or her a pack of smokes and a lighter? Will we find out too late?</p>
<p class="TXT">We already know many of the ways in which EMR puts our bodies under stress. Testosterone markers go down. Immune system and free-radical damage go up. Cell senescence is distorted, so the natural death cycle of the cells is altered, and cancer rates go up. All this and a whole lot more continues to happen, and we’re still not doing anything about it. The smartest people in the world keep their phones in their pants pockets and their bras, their laptops on their laps, up against their most delicate body parts, blasting them with potentially lethal electromagnetic fields.</p>
<p class="TXT">And no one is taking responsibility. No regulatory body has got your back.</p>
<p class="TXT">In 2015, the European Commission’s Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks reviewed the research on electromagnetic fields in general and cell phones in particular.<sup> </sup>It found that even extremely-low-frequency EMFs could be linked to an increased risk of childhood leukemia. How did we not all know that? How was that not front-page news? It’s interesting what else the committee said: that so far, no studies have determined exactly <span class="ital">how</span> cell phones might give kids that terrible disease.</p>
<p class="TXT">What does that tell us? It tells us that nobody with the funding or the expertise to figure it out really wants us to know—because once we know, somebody will have to do something about it. It reminds me of the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page124" title="124"/>playbook the tobacco companies used for decades: the old “we’re not sure because it needs more testing” and then never actually doing the credible research, just kicking the questions down the road.</p>
<p class="TXT">Consider this from the <span class="ital">International Journal of Oncology</span>, published in 2017:</p>
<p class="EXTTF">The [International Agency for Research on Cancer] working group reached the conclusion that RF radiation from devices that emit non-ionizing RF radiation . . . is a Group 2B, i.e. a “possible,” human carcinogen. . . .</p>
<p class="EXTTL">Several laboratory studies have indicated mechanisms of action for RF radiation carcinogenesis such as on DNA repair, oxidative stress, down regulation of mRNA and DNA damage with single strand breaks. A report was released from The National Toxicology Program (NTP) under the National Institutes of Health (NIH) in the USA on the largest ever animal study on cell phone RF radiation and cancer. An increased incidence of glioma in the brain and malignant schwannoma in the heart was found in rats. Acoustic neuroma or vestibular schwannoma is a similar type of tumour as the one found in the heart, although benign. Thus, this animal study supported human epidemiological findings on RF radiation and brain tumour risk.</p>
<p class="TXT">The study included all sources of radiation, including mobile phone base stations, Wi-Fi access points, smartphones, laptops, and tablets. The report went on to say, “For children this risk may be accentuated because of a cumulative effect during a long lifetime use. Developing and immature cells can also be more sensitive to exposure to RF radiation.”</p>
<p class="TXT">Sound familiar? One cigarette can’t hurt you, but many, over decades, can.</p>
<p class="TXT">Were you aware of any of those studies? Now that you know, how do you feel about your tech habits and those of your children? Look, I get it—because all the waves and radiation we’re discussing in this chapter <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page125" title="125"/>are invisible, it’s easy to pretend they don’t exist. Except that they do. The world of consumer tech and digital devices is the ultimate Fatal Convenience. You can easily find nonharmful shampoos, food containers, or any of the other products I’ve been talking about in this book. But where are you going to find replacements for the technology we depend on day in and out?</p>
<p class="TXT">Nowhere. It’s a serious problem. There <span class="ital">are</span> solutions. Not enough. But some.</p>
<p class="TXF1"><span class="boldsc">THROUGHOUT THIS BOOK, I’VE TRIED</span> to come up with suggestions for avoiding Fatal Conveniences by seeking out healthy alternatives. After giving you the bad news, I’ve looked for ways of answering the obvious question: “Okay, so now what do we do?” Even though this chapter’s subject matter is tricky and complex, and not totally understood even by the experts, we need to answer the same question: Now what?</p>
<p class="TXT">No matter which type of digital technology or device we’re talking about, the issues are pretty much the same: we’re being bathed in electromagnetic radiation, and we’re more or less helpless to stop it. But the ways we use each form of technology are different. Here’s the main thing to remember: electromagnetic energy is always greatest nearest the source. The greater the distance we can create between our bodies and our gadgets, the better off we’ll be. That feels like common sense. It’s a useful rule of thumb.</p>
<p class="TXT">Here’s another: wired is better than wireless.</p>
<p class="TXT">We might never be truly safe. But we can be safer. Let’s see how.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Cell Phones and 5G</p>
<p class="TXF">I admit that cell phones are a miracle. They’re magic. I’ve been lost in countries in the developing world, far from anything or anyone I knew, and they have saved my skin. Cell phones turned the concept of expensive long-distance calls into a dim memory, since “distance” no longer exists, at least as we once understood it. Your voice is turned into an electronic <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page126" title="126"/>signal that is encoded so it can be bounced off satellites and transmitted via cell towers that can read the signal and send it along to the next cell at the speed of light, 186,000 or so miles per second, and once it reaches your device, you hear something that sounds exactly like me. No wonder we treasure our devices—your cell phone is more important to you than your gallbladder.</p>
<p class="TXT">The first call ever made from a handheld device was back in 1973, from a device that weighed around two and a half pounds, about half as much as a brick. You had to charge it for ten hours, and then it worked for only thirty minutes of talk time. The first consumer model, the Motorola DynaTAC, cost $3,995, equivalent to $10,420 today. It now seems as though every person in the world owns a cell phone. A little over half of kids in the United States have a smartphone by the time they’re eleven, a statistic that really scares me.</p>
<p class="TXT">Right now, many of us take advantage of the miracle known as 5G connectivity. It has replaced 4G, which replaced 3G, and so on. Thanks to this latest tech, our devices move more data, and faster, than ever before. If you’re old enough to remember dial-up internet connections, you know what I’m talking about. (And if you’re not, consider yourself lucky.) At some point, 6G, the sixth generation of connectivity, will be here, making our phones and other devices even more amazingly powerful and, yes, convenient.</p>
<p class="TXT">The thing about 5G, though, is that its high-frequency millimeter waves don’t travel as far as its predecessors’ did. This means that many more small cell towers have had to be put in place all around us. 5G transmission also burns more energy than that of the Gs that came before. When I travel around my neighborhood today, I see 5G cell stations all over the place: on telephone poles, on top of schools, everywhere. Why does that matter? Because the electrical energy storm that surrounds us, our total immersion in radiation, is bigger and stronger than ever. And we <span class="ital">still</span> don’t know how much damage it’s doing to our health. We just know that it’s now even more inescapable.</p>
<p class="TXT">We’ve already seen some evidence of the risks we run when using cell <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page127" title="127"/>phones. But there’s plenty more. A 2017 review of existing research into phone use and glioma, a type of cancerous tumor found in the brain and nervous system, was conducted by scientists in China. They came to this conclusion: “Our results suggest that long-term mobile phone use may be associated with an increased risk of glioma. There was also an association between mobile phone use and low-grade glioma in the regular use or long-term use subgroups.”</p>
<p class="TXT"> But as so often happens, the authors were unable to establish hard proof of a link due to the lack of better studies. Here’s what they said: “Current evidence is of poor quality and limited quantity. It is therefore necessary to conduct large sample, high quality research or better characterization of any potential association between long-term ipsilateral mobile phone use and glioma risk.”</p>
<p class="TXT">Two years before that report, the European Commission’s Scientific Committee on Emerging and Newly Identified Health Risks reviewed electromagnetic fields in general and cell phones in particular. It found that overall, epidemiologic studies of extremely-low-frequency fields showed an increased risk of childhood leukemia, even though the research couldn’t determine exactly what about cell phone use caused it. In other words, we know enough to be scared but not enough to know <span class="ital">how</span> scared or precisely why. That’s the reason we continue to be exposed to potentially carcinogenic radiation.</p>
<p class="TXT">Cancer isn’t the only thing we need to be worried about. The blood-brain barrier is a wall of cells that prevents certain harmful molecules from traveling from your bloodstream into your brain. It’s yet another miracle of our bodies. Without it we’d all be dead. What does that have to do with EMR? Albumin, a protein found in the bloodstream, does not normally enter the brain. But when lab rats are exposed to the kind of radiation emitted by cell phones, albumin is detected in their brains—evidence of a breach in the blood-brain barrier.</p>
<p class="TXT">In 2003, Swedish scientists performed studies on rats to see whether radiation of the kind we get from cell phones caused a breakdown of the blood-brain barrier. Here’s what they wrote at the end of their report:</p>
<p class="EXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page128" title="128"/>We chose 12–26-week-old rats because they are comparable with human teenagers—notably frequent users of mobile phones—with respect to age. The situation of the growing brain might deserve special concern from society because biologic and maturational processes are particularly vulnerable during the growth process. The intense use of mobile phones by youngsters is a serious consideration. A neuronal damage of the kind described here may not have immediately demonstrable consequences, even if repeated. In the long run, however, it may result in reduced brain reserve capacity that might be unveiled by other later neuronal disease or even the wear and tear of aging. We cannot exclude that after some decades of (often) daily use, a whole generation of users may suffer negative effects, perhaps as early as in middle age.</p>
<p class="TXT">In a 2006 presentation at a conference on EMF and health, the authors stated that years of cell phone use “may promote the development of autoimmune and neuro-degenerative diseases, and we conclude that the suppliers of mobile communication—and our politicians—have an extensive responsibility to support the exploration of these possible risks for the users and the society.”</p>
<p class="TXT">That was way back in 2006, when the latest technology was 3G. Nearly two decades later, we’re still waiting for the mobile communication giants and our political leaders to address these dangers.</p>
<p class="TXT">Here’s yet another terrifying question: Do cell phones damage our ability to produce sperm? In 2021, a review and analysis of cell phone research was published in the scientific journal <span class="ital">Environmental Research</span>. The researchers looked at more than a hundred studies, and here’s what they found: “Mobile phone use decreased the overall sperm quality by affecting the motility, viability, and concentration. It was further reduced in the group with high mobile phone usage. In particular, the decrease was remarkable in <span class="ital">in vivo</span> studies with stronger clinical significance in subgroup analysis. Therefore, long-term cell phone use is a factor that must be considered as a cause of sperm quality reduction.”</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page129" title="129"/>In another study, conducted with a group of subjects who had attended infertility clinics, the men who used their phones most often or kept their phones in their pockets produced less sperm than the rest of the participants. This, the study’s authors said, “might support the suggestion of the negative effect of prolonged cell phone use on male fertility.”</p>
<p class="TXT">In a 2016 survey of existing research, sperm damage was found in twenty-one of twenty-seven studies reviewed. Speaking of reproductive hazards, a 2017 study showed that low-frequency magnetic fields can even increase the risk of miscarriage.</p>
<p class="TXT">Research done at the Cleveland Clinic looked at cell phone use among men and whether it affected their sperm in any meaningful way. Here’s what they found: the more time men spent on their phones, the more damage their sperm sustained. Everything—sperm count, motility, and viability—went down. The subjects were four groups of males: Group 1, not using phones at all; Group 2, using them two hours a day; Group 3, using them two to four hours daily; and Group 4, using them more than four hours a day. You know what they found? Sperm count was negatively affected as phone use increased! Basically, their phones were neutering them. Now think of the exposure your kids are getting. Clearly, there’s a need for more research into what exactly is going on here.</p>
<p class="TXT">It seems as though there are never enough credible studies, never sufficient scientific evidence, to prove what many people (me included) already believe: that we’re endangering our health by absorbing so much radiation.</p>
<p class="TXT">My frustrating search for hard-core proof went on and on until just about the time I was finishing this chapter. That was when I found it: the first research I’ve seen to prove beyond the shadow of a doubt that 5G definitely harms our health, by causing something called “the microwave syndrome.”</p>
<p class="TXT">The article was published in 2022 in the Swedish journal <span class="ital">Medicinsk Access</span>, based on a study conducted by Lennart Hardell, a Swedish oncologist and researcher from the Forskningsstiftelsen Miljö &amp; Cancer (Research Foundation for Environment &amp; Cancer), and Mona Nilsson <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page130" title="130"/>from the Strålskyddsstiftelsen (Radiation Protection Foundation). They looked at what happened after a 5G base station was installed on the roof of an apartment building, just five meters above one unit’s bedroom. Measurements taken before and after the installation showed what the study called a massive increase in radiation in the apartment. Previously, there had been base stations for 3G and 4G in the same place, but once they were exchanged for 5G, the radiation level nearly doubled.</p>
<p class="TXT">According to the study, the couple living in the apartment immediately began to suffer from a long list of symptoms, including fatigue, difficulty sleeping, nosebleeds, tinnitus, skin problems, dizziness, concentration problems, and heart palpitations—all of which decreased or disappeared within a day after they moved to another home with significantly lower radiation. All the conditions they suffered under exposure to 5G radio waves are identical to those first described more than fifty years ago by people who received whole-body microwave radiation.</p>
<p class="TXT">That’s only one study, I realize. I wish there were a thousand more out there. But it’s enough for me. It proves that despite what the telecommunications spokespeople and other so-called experts want us to believe, the radiation that’s all around us thanks to our cell phones and other wireless devices is harmful to our health. How harmful? We don’t know. That’s what makes it so hard to evaluate.</p>
<p class="TXT">Do I take advantage of 5G? Of course I do. However, I’d like it a whole lot more if it used fiber-optic lines to carry the data and the lines were buried underground. Instead, those little cell stations are everywhere, bathing us all in who knows what.</p>
<p class="TXT">As connectivity gets faster, better, and smoother, our reliance on our phones will grow. Meaning we’ll be using them even more than we do now, exposing ourselves to . . . what?</p>
<p class="TXF1"><span class="boldsc">KNOWING ALL THAT, WHAT SHOULD</span> we do? Here’s the number one thing: never, but never, hold your phone against your ear and talk. To me, holding a cell phone against your head during a conversation is as bad <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page131" title="131"/>as smoking cigarettes—or worse. When we use a cell phone that way, we’re increasing our risk of developing tumors of the brain and inner ear, possibly even malignancies.</p>
<p class="TXT">Kids today almost never talk on their phones—they’d rather text, which is smart because it cuts down on the exposure of their brains and auditory nerves to radiation.</p>
<p class="TXT">If you must talk on your phone, do it with wired headphones plus a microphone. Even better, get antiradiation air tube headphones. My friends at Tech Wellness (techwellness.com) make good ones. Certainly, don’t use wireless Bluetooth earbuds. Anything that creates distance between your body parts and your phone is a good thing. The same goes for anything else that doesn’t require a Bluetooth connection.</p>
<p class="TXT">Remember: Wires are good!</p>
<p class="TXT">The Environmental Working Group has sensible advice for how to use a cell phone:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Use it as little as possible. Don’t carry it with you constantly; put it away until you need it. It’s a tool, not a toy.</li>
<li>When you’re not using it, put it into airplane mode, so it emits no pulsed radiation due to the phone’s always trying to connect. Turn it off at night. Whatever you do, don’t sleep with your phone near your head or next to your body. I recently saw a study saying that three-quarters of young people sleep with their phones under their pillows. That’s a <span class="ital">really</span> bad idea.</li>
<li>Boys and men, do not carry your phone in a front pants pocket. Keeping it out of every pocket is even smarter. Considering all the evidence that EMR can alter hormones and damage both sperm quality <span class="ital">and</span> quantity, this is a must. You might want to have a kid someday.</li>
<li>Girls and women, don’t ever put your phone into your bra or into a breast or back pocket. We’re still guessing about the power of radiation to cause cancer. The safest bet is to carry it in your bag or backpack—anywhere but next to your body.</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page132" title="132"/>To all that, I’ll add these tips:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Use speaker mode when you must talk.</li>
<li>Avoid making calls when the signal is weak, as this causes your phone to boost its radio frequency (RF) transmission power.</li>
<li>Consider sending voice memos, my own favorite method of communication.</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">Not every phone emits an equal amount of radiation. The specific absorption rate (SAR) is the amount of RF energy from a given phone that is absorbed by the user’s body. Different cell phones have different SAR levels. Cell phone makers are required to report the maximum SAR level of their products to the FCC. This information can often be found on the manufacturer’s website or in the phone’s user manual. The upper limit of SAR allowed in the United States according to FCC safety guidelines is 1.6 watts per kilogram (W/kg) of body weight.</p>
<p class="TXT">But comparing the SAR values of phones can be misleading. The listed value is based only on the phone operating at its highest power, not on what users would typically be exposed to with normal use. The actual SAR during use varies based on a number of factors, so it’s possible that a phone with a lower SAR value might expose a person to more RF waves than one with a higher SAR value.</p>
<p class="TXT">Keep in mind that even when you’re not using your phone, it is constantly looking for a signal and therefore is always emitting radiation.</p>
<p class="TXT">Here’s something else you can do: Buy a protective device for your phone, such as Safe Sleeve (safesleevecases.com), which can block more than 99 percent of radio frequency, or RF (5G, Wi-Fi, cellular, etc.), and 92 percent of extremely-low-frequency, or ELF (battery, AC power, etc.), radiation.</p>
<p class="TXT">Or try Waveguard (waveguard.com). My good buddy and company founder Hagen Thiers was sensitive to EMR as a kid, and his father set out to help him solve the problem. They came up with this amazing piece of tech. I am a fan of the company’s devices because they decrease stress <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page133" title="133"/>on the body and still allow us to enjoy the benefits of Wi-Fi and cell phones. The company’s website includes information from several studies, including one on how cell phone radiation impairs how well wounds heal. Pretty amazing stuff.</p>
<p class="TXT">Tech Wellness (techwellness.com) is another great resource. August Brice posts a lot of information about her products, including Ethernet cables that allow you to switch your phone to airplane mode and then, using their adapter, plug the ethernet cable into your phone.</p>
<p class="TXT">Here’s one final thing we can all do: reach out to Elon Musk and tell him not to put nearly forty thousand satellites into the atmosphere to blanket the earth with 5G and other forms of EMR. Come on, Elon! We need you to gather more safety data before we allow you and other tech companies to reap profits at the expense of our safety.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Wi-Fi and Routers</p>
<p class="TXF">Here’s two more Fatal Conveniences with a backstory.</p>
<p class="TXT">Most people remember Hedy Lamarr as an Austrian-born Hollywood movie star from back in the 1930s, a total femme fatale. But she also invented a technology used to prevent enemy ships from jamming our torpedo guidance systems. She and her coinventor, a composer named George Antheil, found a way for the radio-operated systems that guided our torpedoes to jump from one frequency to another, thereby making it impossible for an enemy to block the message. Their invention became known as “frequency hopping” and was a big help to the Allied naval forces.</p>
<p class="TXT">For years afterward, the technology found further uses, first in telecommunications and then in an innovation officially known as IEEE 802.11b, or, a little easier to remember, “wireless fidelity,” or Wi-Fi. So thank Hedy and George for the fact that your router can direct data from the internet to the various devices in your home, school, and office.</p>
<p class="TXT">Is there anything else our routers give us? The same kind of radiation <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page134" title="134"/>emitted by all other wireless devices. According to the “experts,” our routers are not dangerous at all. At the same time, however, we’re advised to keep our distance from them. Hmm . . .</p>
<p class="TXT">We need to be especially careful not to position routers too close to where children sleep or play. But we can take stronger measures, too. Since not using a router would also mean we’d not have access to Wi-Fi, getting rid of it is a nonstarter. Short of throwing away your cell phone, it would probably be the most drastic antitech step we could take.</p>
<p class="TXT">I’m sure there’s at least one generation of human beings who can’t even remember a time before Wi-Fi existed. For them—really, for most of us—it’s like oxygen: invisible, everywhere, and necessary to life.</p>
<p class="TXT">So what should you do instead? Connect your computer to your modem with an old-school Ethernet cable. That’s the easiest solution. Or you could put your router on a timer so it automatically turns off at night. But you could also consider using a Faraday cage or a router shield.</p>
<p class="TXT">Michael Faraday was an English genius and practical science pioneer who invented the first electric motor dynamo, produced the first electrical current from a magnetic field, and essentially set the stage for electromagnetic field theory. He did all that during the nineteenth century, but his name has been co-opted for a number of current-day tech innovations, such as Faraday bicycles, to name just one. Another is the Faraday cage, which is a fairly simple thing—a mesh metal box that goes over your router and blocks it from emitting some (but not all) of its radiation. This technology was originally designed to limit interference and noise from magnetic and electric fields so correct scientific measurements could be taken.</p>
<p class="TXT">Today you can buy not just a cage to go over your router but also small bags to hold your phone, enabling it to send or receive messages or calls.</p>
<p class="TXT">There are plenty of products that claim to protect us from EMR. Many are junk with no scientific data to support them—like weird stickers to put on your phone, expensive pendants, or underwear. But others truly work.</p>
<p class="H1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page135" title="135"/>Fatal Convenience: Bluetooth</p>
<p class="TXF">The tenth-century Danish king Harald Gormsson supposedly had a dead tooth that turned blue-gray, which led to his colorful nickname: Bluetooth. He was also famous for uniting Scandinavia, which was why his name was chosen—originally only as a placeholder—until a proper one could be found by the combine of Nokia, Intel, and Ericsson for the short-range wireless connection technology they developed.</p>
<p class="TXT">The name Bluetooth stuck, and it’s now everywhere, literally—all around us, connecting everything, emitting radiation everywhere it goes. By now the list of devices depending on Bluetooth is endless and keeps getting longer, meaning we’re constantly filling the atmosphere with more radiation. That’s the main thing to keep in mind, especially if you’re concerned—as you should be—about how all that radiation is affecting your health.</p>
<p class="TXT">Just think: Fitbits, smart watches, video game controllers, Google glasses, home thermostats, VR headsets, video sunglasses, your car, your refrigerator, your headphones, your sex toys, and a whole lot more, plus all those body function monitors that track your REM sleep, perform EKGs and automatically send the results to your online medical record, and measure your blood pressure, respiration, and any other bodily function that can be observed, quantified, and stored somewhere.</p>
<p class="TXT">It’s the so-called Internet of Things—except that “things” now includes you and me.</p>
<p class="TXT">Insider Intelligence forecasts 3.74 billion mobile connections worldwide by 2025 and more than 64 billion connected devices by 2026. What does that mean for us? Lots more radiation flying around, creating an even bigger, broader electromagnetic field for us to inhabit whether we want to or not. How harmful is all that?</p>
<p class="TXT">It could be worse. Bluetooth headphone exposures fall anywhere between one-tenth and one-four-hundredth what we get from our cell phones, according to the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute’s Dr. David Kozono. “I would therefore expect it would be more difficult to observe <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page136" title="136"/>an association between Bluetooth headphone use and cancer,” he said. But then he added, “Data are lacking however to conclude with certainty that there is or is not a risk of increased cancer.”</p>
<p class="TXT">See what I mean? We’re the guinea pigs in somebody’s real-world lab experiments.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span class="ital">Consumer Reports</span> has done a terrific job of reporting on this stuff. Its staff interviewed Jerry Phillips, a professor of biochemistry at the University of Colorado, Colorado Springs, who said that research has yet to determine how low radiation has to be before it can be considered harmless. They also spoke with David Carpenter, a physician and director of the Institute for Health and the Environment at the University at Albany−State University of New York. He said that being near a single router might be harmless, but often we’re in the presence of many computers and routers, as in schools and apartment buildings.</p>
<p class="TXT">In 2016, the Maryland State Department of Education recommended that schools use wired networks instead of Wi-Fi, turn off routers when not being used, and keep them as far as possible from kids. France has banned Wi-Fi from nursery schools. Now, that is a good idea!</p>
<p class="TXT">For household appliances and other devices used in the home that require electricity, magnetic field levels are highest near the source of the field and decrease rapidly the farther away the user is from the source. Magnetic fields drop big time at a distance of about one foot from most appliances. For computer screens, at a distance of twelve to twenty inches levels are similarly lower.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Microwave Ovens</p>
<p class="TXF">This is the kitchen convenience that seemed like magic when it was introduced back in the 1960s. Suddenly, food that took what felt like forever to cook or reheat came out of this high-tech box in a few minutes and was hotter than hell. We had no idea how exactly it worked—most of us still don’t—but it did the job better than anything else we could imagine, so <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page137" title="137"/>it was okay by us. Today, close to 100 percent of American homes have one, and we use them often.</p>
<p class="TXT">They have a suitably sci-fi backstory. In 1946, a Raytheon engineer was trying to boost the power level of magnetron tubes used in radar when he accidentally discovered the waves’ heating capability. It took another twenty years for Amana’s famous Radarange to invade America’s kitchens. Microwave ovens work by blasting microwaves, which are a little shorter than radio waves, causing the water molecules in the food inside the oven to vibrate at a high frequency, which in turn heats the food. That’s why liquids and vegetables that contain a lot of water heat so fast. There’s no actual warming involved, just a lot of very excited molecules.</p>
<p class="TXT">Of course, that’s what makes microwaves so scary: there’s a chamber full of radiation sitting on your kitchen counter! But because the radiation is nonionizing, it has no power to break up atoms and so has no effect on our bodies (or so we’re told). The potential for danger would be if the oven’s casing gets damaged, and supposedly that doesn’t happen with normal use. In fact, FDA rules require that microwave ovens be designed to prevent radiation leaks.</p>
<p class="TXT">Assuming that the oven itself is safe, how about the food? Does cooking it in a microwave rob it of nutritional value or in any way make it dangerous to eat? All cooking causes vitamins to break down, and when we boil vegetables in water, some nutrition is lost. But because microwaves cook so quickly and without water, they actually preserve some of the beneficial molecules our food contains.</p>
<p class="TXT">Still, my instincts tell me that microwave ovens are bad news. They’re messing with the internal molecular structure of the food we eat. To me, that sounds like it could backfire on us. There are ways to cook and reheat our food without blasting it with radiation. Maybe your stovetop or toaster oven will take a little longer to do the job. I’m willing to wait a minute or two extra if it means I can leave the molecules of my dinner unmolested.</p>
<p class="H2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page138" title="138"/>How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">As far as I’m concerned, radiation is a form of air pollution, maybe even worse than what vehicles or smokestacks spew into our lungs. But the environmental impact of the digital world goes well beyond that. There’s a growing body of research on how radiation affects wildlife and insects such as bees and butterflies. One study from 2018 suggested that EMFs emitted by power lines may stress out honeybees and potentially mess with their ability to pollinate crops—our food!</p>
<p class="TXT">A study by researchers at McMaster University published in the <span class="ital">Journal of Cleaner Production</span> analyzed the carbon impact of the entire information and communications technology (ICT) industry from around 2010 to 2020, including personal computers, laptops, monitors, smartphones, and servers. Here’s what the researchers found: that even as our devices have become more energy efficient, the overall environmental impact of technology is getting worse. ICT produced 1 percent of the global carbon footprint in 2007. Today that figure has nearly tripled and is on its way to exceed 14 percent by 2040. That’s half as much as the entire transportation industry.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So Now What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">Besides the precautions I’ve mentioned above, I’ve hard wired everything possible in my home. I’m plugged back in. I’m swimming against the tide, I realize. The world is becoming more connected wirelessly day by day. Every smart appliance, every wearable, produces more radiation. Just because you can’t see it doesn’t mean it’s not there.</p>
<p class="TXT">Researchers look at our electronic devices individually and pronounce that none of them endangers our health. But we aren’t exposed to only our phones or only our laptops. We’re hit with radiation from multiple sources all at once, all the time. It’s the same phenomenon as with all the industrial chemicals that pound us day after day; it’s not one thing that’s doing the damage, it’s <span class="ital">everything</span>.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page139" title="139"/>I know I’ve said this before, but it’s like that poor camel’s back: it took just one straw too many to break it. I’m not focusing on one source of radiation or one new technology. I’m looking at the physical stress caused by <span class="ital">all</span> of them. That’s not what I want in my life.</p>
<p class="TXT">How about you?</p>
</body>
</html>