<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Fatal Conveniences</title>
  <link href="../Styles/FatalConveniences.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1096cf69-c1c2-4b94-ac1d-5d952fe64055" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<p class="CN"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH009"><span class="blue"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page212" title="212"/>9</span></a></p>
<p class="CT"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH009"><span class="blue">Some Final Thoughts</span></a></p>
<p class="TXFF"><span class="boldsc">I’VE THROWN A LOT OF INFORMATION</span> at you in these pages, but I’ve only scratched the surface. When you consider the sheer number of toxic substances out there, you realize how impossible it would be for anyone to keep track of them all. Every day, new studies come out detailing just how hazardous modern life has become.</p>
<p class="TXT">Aside from all the particulars of the Fatal Conveniences, one message I’ve tried to get across is this: We all need to be extremely careful about everything we buy and use and consume. As I said back at the beginning, we need to interrogate each product in our lives. We need to ask: What exactly <span class="ital">are</span> you? What do you contain? What do you do to make my life better? Do I really need you at all? And what <span class="ital">aren’t</span> you telling me on the front package label that you divulge only on the back in print so tiny it’s illegible, in words that are meaningless to anyone but a scientist? We need to get straight answers to those questions.</p>
<p class="TXT">We go through life assuming that if something can legally be sold, it must be harmless. If it’s in a drugstore, it must be healthy. If it’s in a grocery store, it must be safe to eat. If it comes out of the kitchen tap, it must be okay to drink. We are woefully wrong in those assumptions. In fact, that halo of wholesomeness is what deceives us into dropping our guard and consuming things that do us harm.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page213" title="213"/>But hang on a second—can’t we rely on government agencies at the federal, state, county, and local levels to protect us from things that will make us sick and shorten our lives? They wouldn’t allow toxic substances to be sold, would they?</p>
<p class="TXT">They would.</p>
<p class="TXT">Not because those bureaucracies, administrations, and boards wish us ill, but because there’s no way they can keep up with all the hazards in the world today. And also because when government comes up against big business, you can guess who usually wins. Sad to say, it’s in the corporate world’s best interests to keep pumping out products that are bad for our health and to keep pouring pollutants into our environment. It’s the capitalist way. We have put the god of profit ahead of our health.</p>
<p class="TXT">But there are countermeasures that can be taken, and lucrative ones at that. We can help by consuming in our best (health) interests.</p>
<p class="TXT">We live in fear of getting cancer and wonder why no cure has been discovered despite the fortune we spend on research. But then we use consumer products containing chemicals that are proven carcinogens, relying on government agencies’ assurances that their levels are too low to harm us and forgetting how many times in the past such assurances have been proven false.</p>
<p class="TXT">Or we go around saying “Men are producing dramatically less sperm than they once did, and birthrates are falling, oh, what could be behind this scary situation?” Meanwhile, fetuses are absorbing one proven endocrine-system disruptor after another, chemicals that we <span class="ital">know</span> have a damaging effect on our ability to reproduce.</p>
<p class="TXT">Hello? Are we suicidal? Do we really not understand that those chemicals might be to blame and maybe we ought to quit using them? Or is it just that we’d rather keep putting toxic substances into our bodies even if it means we’ll never have grandchildren?</p>
<p class="TXT">A lot of my thinking about Fatal Conveniences can be explained by a concept known as <span class="ital">allostatic load</span>, a scientific term for a fairly simple idea: that all the chemicals and other substances we’re exposed to on a daily <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page214" title="214"/>basis have a cumulative effect on our health that’s impossible to measure. There are just too many things going on on too many different levels for scientists to determine the total impact on our bodies.</p>
<p class="TXT">There’s a related term: <span class="ital">allostatic overload</span>. You can probably guess what that one means, but I’ll quote the abstract of a survey that examined the results of 267 original studies: “Allostatic load refers to the cumulative burden of chronic stress and life events. It involves the interaction of different physiological systems at varying degrees of activity. When environmental challenges exceed the individual ability to cope, then allostatic overload ensues.”</p>
<p class="TXT">One sentence there needs to be repeated: “When environmental challenges exceed the individual ability to cope, then allostatic overload ensues.” That’s where we are today: in overload. This is why all the assurances that chemicals are harmless in the amounts we ingest are worthless. This is the reason all the promises that the radiation from our digital devices won’t damage our DNA are deceptive. Because we’re not getting just a few chemicals, we’re getting thousands. We’re not absorbing just a small amount of radiation, we’re bathed in it twenty-four hours a day.</p>
<p class="TXT">No scientist, no researcher has ever figured out how to measure the effects of all that on every human body. Even the combined powers of the FDA, the EPA, the CDC, Procter &amp; Gamble, Maybelline, General Foods, and Apple can’t tell you how the total onslaught of supposedly “safe” chemicals and radiation will affect your health.</p>
<p class="TXF1"><span class="boldsc">AS I’VE BEEN WORKING ON</span> this book, I’ve also been shooting a series for Netflix called <span class="ital">Down to Earth</span>. While doing that, I’ve been immersed in solutions big and small to our planet’s problems. I’ve been introduced to companies such as Footprint (footprintus.com), a B-to-B outfit creating alternatives to single-use plastic. It’s now working with nine of the top ten consumer goods corporations in the world, including Walmart, McDonald’s, and Conagra Brands. Maybe someday the tidal wave of plastic that has engulfed us will no longer exist.</p>
<p class="TXT">By now we’ve all heard and read the words <span class="ital">climate crisis</span> a million <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page215" title="215"/>times. Experts, politicians, government officials, and activists tell us to do this or stop doing that “because of climate change.” We get a nonstop stream of lectures about how our habits and consumer choices are damaging something called “the environment.”</p>
<p class="TXT">I get it. I totally do. But I had a sudden realization, like a bolt of lightning: the way we think about this subject is a big part of the problem. We’ve been taught to think of “the environment” as something separate from ourselves. As though the environment is out there, in terrible danger, but we’re in here, safe and sound. To some people, that may be a comforting thought. But it’s not true. We’re all part of the environment, the same as every tree, lake, fish, and flower. We’re just one more living thing, with the same basic needs as every other creature. If something damages the planet, it damages each of us as an individual. If I drink a plastic bottle of water, I’m being poisoned by all the chemicals, phthalates, petrochemicals, endocrine disruptors, and other garbage in it. Once I finish the water and throw the bottle away, the bottle poisons the world outside my body. Then that pollution comes back and poisons me again. This is the cycle we’ve created. As long as I can think of the environment as something separate from my own body, I can kid myself into thinking that I’m safe. Except I’m not. If it hurts me, it hurts the environment. If it hurts the environment, it hurts me. We’re one and the same.</p>
<p class="TXT">The “crisis” isn’t just about the climate up in the atmosphere. It’s right here in the choices we make and the way we live. Every convenience we purchase either harms us or helps us. If we choose healthy products, we and our planet will both benefit. Keep that in mind next time you shop for food, toothpaste, a mattress, a T-shirt, or anything else. Wake up, take action, enjoy every nonfatal convenience, and live your best life ever—your superlife!</p>
</body>
</html>