<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Fatal Conveniences</title>
  <link href="../Styles/FatalConveniences.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1096cf69-c1c2-4b94-ac1d-5d952fe64055" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<p class="CN"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH003"><span class="blue"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page27" title="27"/>3</span></a></p>
<p class="CT"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH003"><span class="blue">Our Chemical Romance</span></a></p>
<p class="TXFF"><span class="boldsc">YOU’RE GOING TO NOTICE, AS YOU</span> read this book, that I spend a lot of time talking about chemicals. Not the most exciting subject to many, I suspect, but it’s important to understand, at least a little, if we’re going to deal with all the dangers constantly swimming around us. I’ll try not to turn this into homework.</p>
<p class="TXT">First, let me point out something obvious: everything contains chemicals. Water and air are made of chemicals. Trees, grass, and flowers are made of chemicals. Puppies, kittens, and bunnies are made of chemicals. Your mom is made of chemicals!</p>
<p class="TXT">And just because a chemical is found in nature doesn’t mean it’s safe or healthy. Rice, for example, contains arsenic. Every year people die from poisonous mushrooms. Salt, if you eat too much, will kill you. Some minerals are radioactive.</p>
<p class="TXT">But it’s the nonnatural chemicals that should worry us, the new ones that are constantly being created in industrial labs for commercial uses. There are more than eighty thousand in existence and more being created every year, only a small number of which (medicines and pesticides, mostly) are ever tested for safety. Neither does anyone test them to see how they interact with one another.</p>
<p class="TXT">Let that sink in: these substances are out in our world, we’re all being exposed to them every minute of every day, yet for a long time nobody <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page28" title="28"/>in charge thought it was a good idea to evaluate them first to see if they would make us sick or kill us.</p>
<p class="TXT">How could that be?</p>
<p class="TXT">In truth, there were plenty of scientists who believed that chemicals should be tested. But big business and lax regulators made sure that didn’t happen. This situation began to change a little in 1976, when a federal law, the Toxic Substances Control Act, was passed. But it took four more decades before that law was given some teeth, with the 2016 passage of a reform bill, the Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act. This gave the EPA the power to require testing of new and existing chemicals to see if they are harmful to our health. There are even some extra protections in there for children and pregnant women. But regulators are going to be playing catch-up for a long time, trying to test all existing chemicals along with the hundreds of new ones added annually.</p>
<p class="TXT">The fact that these chemicals are, for the most part, invisible and undetectable means that we are unaware of what we’re taking in with our food and water, the air we breathe, our personal care products, our clothing, and just about everything else we consume. Add in all the chemicals used in industrial processes that take place where we can’t see them but still enter our environment, and the picture becomes even scarier. We’re virtually helpless to defend ourselves.</p>
<p class="TXT">Of course, that’s government’s main job—to keep us safe from forces beyond our control. But please don’t go through life thinking that we can trust regulators to protect us from harm. For instance, at least three federal government agencies regulate the use of benzene, a carcinogen that’s been linked to leukemia, bone marrow cancer, and other serious blood disorders. It’s found in cigarette smoke and gasoline, which tells you how safe it must be.</p>
<p class="TXT">Still, as I was writing this, a manufacturer announced the recall of eighteen varieties of a popular spray deodorant, all of which had concerning levels of the chemical. And a few months before that, another <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page29" title="29"/>consumer products giant had to recall two of its sunscreens due to their benzene content.</p>
<p class="TXT">What does this tell us? That even when the government tries to protect us, its efforts sometimes fail—and we don’t find out until after the damage is done.</p>
<p class="TXT">Testing individual chemicals isn’t enough, because that doesn’t evaluate how they behave in combination. It’s possible that when two or more chemicals interact, they affect us in ways that neither one does on its own. Is it even possible to measure the infinite number of likely chemical combinations inside each one of us?</p>
<p class="TXT">Nope!</p>
<p class="TXT">In a 2015 study published in the journal <span class="ital">Carcinogenesis</span>, eighty-five commonly used industrial chemicals found in everyday products were tested to see if they could trigger cancerous tumors. Fifty of the chemicals were found to affect cancer-causing processes in the human body, even at the low levels found in our environment.</p>
<p class="TXT">“We live in a chemical soup,” said the toxicologist Linda Birnbaum, the then director of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.</p>
<p class="TXT">It seems to me that we have our priorities upside down. Corporations create products using untested chemicals, many of which are known to be harmful to human health. The companies grab the cash today, and when the scientific truth catches up with them, they ask for forgiveness, settle lawsuits, pay fines, and conduct product recalls. To them, this is just the cost of doing business, which is passed along to consumers. Human safety is not their top priority. Our health is not their responsibility. That’s the truth.</p>
<p class="TXT">Let’s look at just one group of man-made substances that’s everywhere in our lives. Their scientific name is PFAS, or in some cases PFOS, though both are also known as “forever chemicals.” That nickname is a pretty good hint about why we should fear them.</p>
<p class="TXT">I won’t bore you with any of the technical jargon used to describe <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page30" title="30"/>these industrial concoctions, but I will point out that they’ve been deemed by scientists as “persistent organic pollutants,” and it’s the <span class="ital">persistent</span> part that should worry us. It means that they endure, without breaking down, for a very long time, in the environment—and also inside us.</p>
<p class="TXT">PFAS chemicals make surfaces slick and frictionless. That’s pretty much all they do. You might not imagine that making things slippery would be such a huge industry, with so many applications. But it definitely is. These chemicals are why some fabrics don’t wrinkle, why your mascara is waterproof, why fast food doesn’t stick to the wrapper, and why dental floss slips so easily between your teeth, to name just a few of the hundreds of commercial uses.</p>
<p class="TXT">The most famous of these chemicals, Teflon, the nonstick surface on cookware, was developed by a DuPont scientist in the 1940s. A decade later, the stain repellent Scotchgard was discovered in a 3M lab—by accident. (An experimental compound spilled on a lab assistant’s sneaker, and that spot refused to get dirty.) By 2000, Scotchgard was a $300-million-a-year product, but it was around that time that 3M realized that the active chemicals were, in the words of a researcher in <span class="ital">Environmental Science and Technology</span>, “persistent, bioaccumulative, ubiquitous in the environment and linked with adverse effects in laboratory experiments,” meaning that they were long lasting, widespread, and dangerous—an ugly combination.</p>
<p class="TXT">At that point, the company developed other formulations so that Scotchgard could continue to do its job. But stain repellents are still the biggest use of these chemicals, with an estimated global market of over $2 billion a year. Teflon is no longer used in nonstick coating. But cousins of Teflon still show up hidden inside many products we all wear and use.</p>
<p class="TXT">I’d love to offer you a complete list of all these forever chemicals so you can avoid them. But I can’t—according to the federal Environmental Protection Agency, there are by now thousands of them in circulation. And nowhere on any label will you ever find the acronym PFAS, so don’t bother looking. The different ways in which we are exposed to these <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page31" title="31"/>chemicals is so long, it will make you dizzy. Here’s just a partial list of where they’re found:</p>

<ul class="ultxt"><li>Stain-resistant fabrics</li>
<li>Lipstick, eyeliner, mascara, foundation, concealer, lip balm, and blush</li>
<li>Nail polish</li>
<li>Firefighting foam</li>
<li>Baby bibs</li>
<li>Bedding</li>
<li>Carpets</li>
<li>No-iron clothing</li>
<li>Waterproof outerwear</li>
<li>Furniture and car upholstery</li>
<li>Fast-food wrappers</li>
<li>Plastic food packaging</li>
<li>Microwave popcorn</li>
<li>Leather</li>
<li>Paper</li>
<li>Rubber</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">Thanks to all those products (and more!), these chemicals are widely dispersed throughout our environment, which is how our tap water has become contaminated with them. And when our drinking water contains something, we do, too. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) says it has found PFASs in the blood of nearly every individual it has tested for them, indicating “widespread exposure to these PFAS in the U.S. population.”</p>
<p class="TXT">So unless you’ve been living in a cave on a mountaintop near a bubbling spring far from civilization for the past fifty years, you definitely have these chemicals in your body. If you’re pregnant, your developing baby has some, too, despite the fact that he or she has yet to enjoy any conveniences of any kind.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page32" title="32"/>Their potential for harm isn’t even slightly in question. An advisory board to the EPA called them a “likely” carcinogen in humans. According to the Environmental Working Group, “The PFAS pollution crisis is a public health emergency.” PFASs have been linked to:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Kidney cancer</li>
<li>Testicular cancer</li>
<li>Liver disease</li>
<li>Thyroid disease</li>
<li>High cholesterol levels</li>
<li>Ulcerative colitis</li>
<li>Difficulties during pregnancy</li>
<li>Suppressed immune system in children</li>
<li>Low birth weight</li>
</ul>

<p class="TXT">In the summer of 2021, the US House of Representatives passed the PFAS Action Act, which would allow the EPA to limit the chemicals’ presence in drinking water, require testing of every PFAS for toxicity, and force all consumer products labels to list these chemicals when they are among the ingredients. If it had been enacted into law, it would have made a difference, we’re told. But it died in Congress. The best we can expect, it seems, is that the current White House will do everything in its power to eliminate PFASs from our lives. That’s definitely not all we could hope for. It’s absolutely less than we need and deserve. But it’s better than nothing, I guess.</p>
<p class="TXT">But while we’re waiting (and <span class="ital">waiting</span>) for action on that legislation, no limits have been set on the concentration of PFASs in our drinking water, as they have for other pollutants such as benzene, uranium, and arsenic. Tired of depending on the feds, seven states—California, Connecticut, Maine, Minnesota, New York, Vermont, and Washington—have banned them. Eight other states—Colorado, Hawaii, Iowa, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Rhode Island—have proposed similar legislation.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page33" title="33"/>Can we do anything else about them? We can all invest in water filters, true, and make every effort to protect ourselves. But that’s not a real solution to a societywide disaster.</p>
<p class="TXT">Manufacturers have agreed to phase out some PFASs used in food packaging by 2024. Some of the biggest fast-food outfits, including McDonald’s, Wendy’s, Chipotle, and Panera Bread, have promised to stop using wrappers lined with PFASs. In 2021, legislation called the Keep Food Containers Safe from PFAS Act was introduced in both houses of Congress.</p>
<p class="TXT">Unfortunately, PFASs will still come into the country in goods imported from abroad. Again, the fact that these are “forever” chemicals means that the ones in existence now aren’t going away soon. Maybe future generations will benefit from these steps. But if you’re alive today, PFASs are in your system.</p>
<p class="TXT">There’s a lesson here: the sweeter the convenience, the greater the potential harm it’s capable of causing. How much time and effort have we saved thanks to no-iron sheets, nonstick frying pans, stain-resistant fabric? Was it worth the potential of developing cancer, hormone disruption, and all the other ills associated with PFASs? Not to me. But to the companies that created all these so-called miracles? The profits tell the tale.</p>
<p class="TXT">Another danger of forever chemicals is that they are known hormone disruptors, meaning that they interfere with our endocrine system and even our ability to make babies. This is serious stuff; our hormones control not just our reproductive functions but also a long list of other systems that keep us alive and well. These chemicals are responsible for neutering boys by damaging their ability to produce sperm. They also can push girls into early puberty.</p>
<p class="TXT">According to the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), a federal agency, endocrine disruptors are found in a long list of chemicals used to make products we buy and use in our homes, our clothing, even in the foods we eat. Here are just a few of the most common examples on the NIEHS list.</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page34" title="34"/>Bisphenol A (BPA):</span> Used to make polycarbonate plastics and epoxy resins, which are found in many plastic products including food storage containers</li>
<li><span class="bold">Dioxins:</span> Produced as a by-product of herbicide production and paper bleaching; are also released into the environment during waste burning and wildfires</li>
<li><span class="bold">Perchlorate:</span> A by-product of the aerospace, weapons, and pharmaceutical industries found in drinking water and fireworks</li>
<li><span class="bold">Phthalates:</span> Used to make plastics more flexible; found in some food packaging, cosmetics, water bottles, children’s toys, and medical devices</li>
<li><span class="bold">Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs):</span> Used to make flame retardants for household products such as furniture foam and carpets</li>
<li><span class="bold">Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs):</span> Used to make electrical equipment such as transformers and in hydraulic fluids, heat transfer fluids, lubricants, and plasticizers</li>
<li><span class="bold">Triclosan:</span> May be found in some antimicrobial and personal care products, such as liquid bodywash</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">According to the NIEHS, “Even low doses of endocrine-disrupting chemicals may be unsafe. The body’s normal endocrine functioning involves very small changes in hormone levels, yet we know even these small changes can cause significant developmental and biological effects. This observation leads scientists to think that endocrine-disrupting chemical exposures, even at low amounts, can alter the body’s sensitive systems and lead to health problems.”</p>
<p class="TXT">But the agency acknowledges the impossibility of knowing for sure the ways we’re being affected by these chemicals: “Because people are typically exposed to multiple endocrine disruptors at the same time, assessing public health effects is difficult.”</p>
<p class="TXT">So even when we’re aware of the potential risks, nobody—not even the experts—can figure out precisely how we’re being harmed or how seriously. Given all that, what, if anything, can <span class="ital">we</span> do?</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page35" title="35"/>As I’ll say again and again in these pages, we need to interrogate our conveniences before we start using them, not years or decades later. We need to make sure we know exactly what they contain and how their contents might harm us. We can’t rely on officials to do it. The government’s power to protect citizens is limited, especially when it comes to regulating corporations and commercial products. Certainly, we can’t expect the companies to warn us off their merchandise, even when they know or suspect the damage it will do. I wish this weren’t true, but it’s up to us to protect ourselves.</p>
<p class="TXT">Many of the man-made chemicals contained in products that we buy every day are poisoning our air, water, soil, and bodies. This is not about consumerism or politics—it’s pure common sense: the businesses we support shouldn’t be harming us. But as we’ll see, virtually every personal care product contains untested synthetic chemicals. The same is true of household soaps and detergents, as well as the clothes you and your family wear. And no one is responsible if some turn out to be toxic.</p>
<p class="TXT">At some point down the line, somebody will say, “Gee, if only we had known it caused cancer or some other horrible disease!” We <span class="ital">did</span> know. At least some of us did. Official neglect is called “plausible deniability.” It means that if a governmental agency or company didn’t know for sure that a substance was harmful, how could they warn us about it? From my point of view, this is a crime.</p>
<p class="TXT">How are we okay with this? And if we’re not, why do we accept it?</p>
<p class="TXT">Let’s decide now that we are through living this way and demand change. Let’s create a world that will allow us to live healthy lives, where businesses will take seriously their responsibility to do the right things for humans, animals, and the planet we all call home.</p>
</body>
</html>