<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Fatal Conveniences</title>
  <link href="../Styles/FatalConveniences.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1096cf69-c1c2-4b94-ac1d-5d952fe64055" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<p class="CN"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH007"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page140" title="140"/><span class="blue">7</span></a></p>
<p class="CT"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH007"><span class="blue">Clothing</span></a></p>
<p class="TXFF"><span class="boldsc">FOR PRACTICALLY MY ENTIRE ADULT LIFE,</span> I’ve been superaware and supercareful about what I put on my skin. Like I said earlier, my father’s experience with chemical sensitivity opened my eyes to the harmful toxins contained in ordinary consumer products. So I’ve done my best to avoid each and every nasty one.</p>
<p class="TXT">But it never occurred to me that something just as bad was rubbing against nearly every inch of me almost twenty-four hours a day: my clothes!</p>
<p class="TXT">My eyes were opened when I met Jeff Garner, an artist who also designs a line of sustainable, healthy, truly beautiful fashions under the name Prophetik. His creations have been worn to the Academy Awards and appeared in <span class="ital">Vogue</span>, so he’s the real thing. He mentioned to me that everything he makes is colored using vegetable dyes only. When I asked him if chemical tints were truly so bad, Jeff was like, “Dude, your clothes are spewing formaldehyde at you! They’re off-gassing all kinds of gnarly stuff.” That’s what started me down the path of examining how our clothing is made and why it harms us.</p>
<p class="TXT">It wasn’t always this way. In the beginning, clothes were made of natural fibers only: wool, cotton, linen, hemp, silk, hides, fur. The raw materials didn’t need much in the way of processing. When textiles were tinted, nature’s own dyes were used. They did the job.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page141" title="141"/>They still do; soak a clean white T-shirt in hot water with a raw beet in it for red or some powdered turmeric for yellow, and see for yourself. I’ve done this myself: a vest I really like got stained, so I put it into hot water along with some powdered chaga mushrooms, and it came out dark brown—and stain free. Way back in time, we also made dyes from minerals and even insects. And that was about it.</p>
<p class="TXT">Fabrics today are treated with a long list of man-made chemicals and synthetic dyes plus a whole lot more. We buy garments that we never need to iron because they’re “permanent press,” “no-iron,” or “wrinkle free.” Our clothing boasts that it’s stain resistant, waterproof, flame retardant, oil resistant, odor fighting, even antimicrobial.</p>
<p class="TXT">Where do you think all those extra features—those superpowers—come from? Textiles are manufactured and treated with industrial-strength chemicals, many of which aren’t tested before they’re put into use. Some contain toxic substances proven by research to cause harm to living things. Some are known carcinogens.</p>
<p class="TXT">What about the long list of nonnatural fabrics, everything from polyester, nylon, and fleece to spandex and Lycra? They all require little care, they’re usually cheaper than natural textiles, and they wear really well. Sweatsuits and yoga pants, which once were worn only in the gym or on the track, now show up everywhere. They’re made of high-tech, cool-looking fabrics.</p>
<p class="TXT">But they’re all petroleum based—made from oil—and engineered in corporate labs. Many fabrics contain tiny particles of metal or plastic microbeads, which are shed every time we wear them or wash them. They wind up on our skin, in our lungs, in waterways, in aquatic plant and animal life; they are even found in the water used to irrigate farm crops. In a way, what’s happened to clothing is just like what’s changed about our food supply: once it was all natural, and today it’s ultraprocessed—transformed into industrial products without a lot of concern about how that will affect our health.</p>
<p class="TXT">When we get dressed, we think we know what we’re putting on, but in reality, we have no idea. We’re careful about what we allow inside our <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page142" title="142"/>bodies, but somehow we forget that our skin is a vital organ that’s exposed virtually twenty-four hours a day to the clothing we wear. Skin’s main job is to protect us from the external world, so maybe we figure that nothing bad can get through.</p>
<p class="TXT">But that isn’t the case; our skin is permeable. Things that touch us on the surface can shed substances that make their way inside to our bloodstream and from there to all other parts of our bodies. We’re all familiar with how patches are placed on the skin to transport medications to our internal organs. We may not want to think that harmful chemicals can get inside the same way. But they can, and they do.</p>
<p class="TXT">Here’s a good example. In 2016, some flight attendants on American Airlines were issued new uniforms. The attendants immediately began experiencing weird phenomena, everything from rashes, hives, and headaches to bloody noses, respiratory difficulties, and autoimmune disease symptoms. Some of them ended up hospitalized. In all, five thousand airline employees reported problems once they began wearing the new outfits.</p>
<p class="TXT">Even passengers on their flights were affected; a baby held just for a moment by one attendant developed a rash, which was attributed to the chemicals used in manufacturing the uniform fabrics. That’s an extreme case, granted. But I guarantee you that the same toxic chemicals that caused those reactions are in the clothing we all wear every day. They contain the same likely carcinogens, the same caustic irritants. We’re all being inundated with them, in most cases not at levels high enough to make us noticeably sick. Not yet.</p>
<p class="TXT">In this chapter, I’ll talk about the harm we suffer and the risks we run from wearing the things we wear. But I’ll also get into the less obvious health hazards: the huge environmental toll that comes from the way our clothes are made.</p>
<p class="TXT">You don’t have to take my word about our clothing’s impact on the planet. This is from a 2019 report prepared by the British Parliament’s House of Commons Environmental Audit Committee, titled <span class="ital">Fixing Fashion: Clothing Consumption and Sustainability</span>:</p>
<p class="EXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page143" title="143"/>The way we make, use and throwaway our clothes is unsustainable. Textile production contributes more to climate change than international aviation and shipping combined, consumes lake-sized volumes of fresh water and creates chemical and plastic pollution. Synthetic fibres are being found in the deep sea, in Arctic sea ice, in fish and shellfish. Our biggest retailers have “chased the cheap needle around the planet,” commissioning production in countries with low pay, little trade union representation and weak environmental protection. In many countries, poverty pay and conditions are standard for garment workers, most of whom are women. We are also concerned about the use of child labour, prison labour, forced labour and bonded labour in factories and the garment supply chain. Fast fashions’ overproduction and overconsumption of clothing is based on the globalisation of indifference towards these manual workers.</p>
<p class="TXT">The damage the production of our clothes does to the environment is enormous. Huge volumes of water are used in textile dyeing, along with comparable amounts of energy. Dyeing cotton requires 125 liters of water per kilogram of fabric; meaning that the manufacture of a single T-shirt uses fifteen to twenty liters of water. Globally, the textile industry uses 21 trillion liters of water annually and is responsible for an estimated one-fifth of all industrial water pollution. That’s because of all the dyes, salts, heavy metals, and other chemicals used, which form a toxic soup.</p>
<p class="TXT">The World Bank tested sample waterways in locations where textiles are manufactured and found seventy-two dangerous chemicals. Once the dyes are released into rivers and streams, they form a tinted film that blocks out light, killing animal and plant life. These chemicals then make their way from the water into the food chain, where they can be found in vegetables and fruits.</p>
<p class="TXT">Maybe the most dangerous thing about clothing is that it doesn’t seem like an environmental hazard. When you see a photo of thousands of plastic bags floating around in the middle of the ocean or empty water bottles desecrating a beautiful riverbank, or watch a video of sea animals <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page144" title="144"/>being choked to death by plastic six-pack rings, you’re horrified by the obscenity of all that toxic trash.</p>
<p class="TXT">But our clothes? They look so comfortable and familiar. What could be the harm in a nice, soft cotton T-shirt? Or some cool new jeans?</p>
<p class="TXT">Plenty, it turns out. Think of all the T-shirts and jeans there are in the world—in your clothes closet, in every apparel store, on every fashion e-commerce website.</p>
<p class="TXT">Everything we wear creates an environmental impact—from farming to manufacturing, even to laundering. For the most part, fabrics are made and turned into garments in poor countries for the simple reason that labor costs there are disgracefully low. We might be tempted to believe that the pollution from manufacturing, preparing, treating, and dyeing textiles and turning them into apparel poisons only those parts of the planet.</p>
<p class="TXT">Think again.</p>
<p class="TXT">First, we all live in the same world; when we defile it, every part gets defiled. This dynamic comes up time and again when we discuss our consumer habits—there’s literally no distance between ourselves and the environmental damage our Fatal Conveniences cause. It all comes home. I’ve said this repeatedly throughout the book, mainly because it’s so easy for us to forget or ignore that all our consumer choices come with a cost—to the health of the planet as well as our own.</p>
<p class="TXT">You may not be aware that your new jeans contain microscopic plastic beads. When you wash them, they go from your washer into the water supply and before long right back into you. They’re in the air we breathe and the food we eat. And how about the pesticides and other harsh chemicals used to grow and dye cotton, hemp, and other plant fibers? And the petrochemicals used to make polyester, nylon, and other synthetic fabrics? Today, the majority of clothing sold in the world is made of nonnatural materials, mainly petroleum based. In addition to the carbon footprint of that unsustainable source of fabric, factor in the industrial processes required to turn oil into clothing. Don’t forget the cruel, environmentally <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page145" title="145"/>devastating animal slaughter needed to produce leather and suede shoes, outerwear, and other clothing.</p>
<p class="TXT">What makes things even worse is the huge amount of waste in the system. By one estimate, more than 15 million tons of textiles are wasted annually—never used in products, gone instead straight into landfills. An outfit called Reverse Resources hosts an online marketplace that connects fabric factories and fashion designers who want to use leftover material to make clothes. According to a 2016 study, the garment industry creates almost enough wasted textiles annually to cover the entire country of Estonia.</p>
<p class="TXT">Now, maybe you’re not a geography wizard, so you don’t know how big Estonia is: 17,463 square miles. That means we’re talking about a lot of wasted fabric, along with all the resources used to create it. Globally, according to estimates, roughly one-third of all food is wasted somewhere along the line from producers to consumers, and now we’re seeing the same level of heedless, destructive waste when it comes to fabric and apparel. Squandering resources seems to be built into the way we humans operate, but it doesn’t have to be that way. These are massively failed and failing systems!</p>
<p class="TXT">Regeneration (regeneration.org), founded by my buddy Paul Hawken, is a force for good when it comes to the way our consumer habits interact with the environment and our health. Its website is packed with information and useful ideas about how we can become better, smarter clothing buyers. Here are a few of its suggestions:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Wash your clothing less often.</span> This keeps pollutants such as plastic and other substances out of the water supply. It also means that your clothes will last longer. And there are devices made for use in our washing machines that capture shed plastic microparticles before they can be released into the water supply.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Repair and recycle.</span> Next time a T-shirt gets a hole in it, don’t throw it away; turn it into something else, something unique and cool, or <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page146" title="146"/>cover the hole with a patch. Back in the 1960s, people paved over the holes in their worn jeans with all kinds of groovy patches. We thought it made our clothes even cooler. Or maybe your dog needs a T-shirt.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Trade with your friends.</span> This is another trend young consumers are adopting: when you’ve either outgrown garments or become bored with them, call some buddies over and offer to swap with clothing they’re ready to get rid of. You can get a whole new wardrobe this way for zero dollars and no environmental impact.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Sell your used clothes.</span> Today, on online marketplaces such as The RealReal (therealreal.com), you can make money from your good-quality used clothing, especially things that cost a lot and are still in style.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Give your old clothes away.</span> Nonprofits such as Goodwill and Salvation Army have been recycling clothing since long before it was trendy.</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">As you can see, there’s a lot here to think about. Let’s get started.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Stain-Resistant, Waterproof, Wrinkle-Free Clothing</p>
<p class="TXF">It takes work to keep our clothes looking good. After we wash them, we have to iron them, because who wants wrinkles? Once we’re wearing them, we try to keep them clean and neat and looking sharp. So it was probably only a matter of time before science came to the rescue. Next thing you know, we’re wearing clothes that practically take care of themselves: no more ironing; no more stains; clothes that refuse to get wet.</p>
<p class="TXT">But there must be a price to pay; there’s always a price. In this case, it’s the industrial-strength toxicity that comes with those conveniences.</p>
<p class="TXT">I discussed this earlier: the PFAS group of chemicals. A brief recap: they started life as Teflon and Scotchgard, and their main function is to make things slippery. That’s why stains and oil don’t stick to treated <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page147" title="147"/>clothes and water runs off without soaking in. They’re kind of miracle substances—until you realize some of their unadvertised features.</p>
<p class="TXT">PFASs, as I’ve said before, are known as “forever chemicals,” meaning that instead of breaking down they build up, both in the environment and inside our bodies (this is called <span class="ital">bioaccumulation</span>). They can do us serious harm: according to the International Agency for Research on Cancer, part of the World Health Organization, PFASs are “likely carcinogenic” and have been associated with:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Kidney cancer</li>
<li>Testicular cancer</li>
<li>Liver disease</li>
<li>Ulcerative colitis</li>
<li>Thyroid problems</li>
<li>Decreased birth weight</li>
<li>High cholesterol</li>
<li>Neurotoxicity</li>
<li>Immune system dysfunction</li>
<li>Hormone disruption</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">That’s an unbelievable list of horrible effects these chemicals can have on us, isn’t it? In addition, children, because of their size and developing immune systems, are even more susceptible to PFAS toxicity. According to one study, exposure to the chemicals caused a 50 percent decrease in antibody concentration in children aged five to seven.</p>
<p class="TXT">Aside from wearing them, we’re constantly being exposed to PFASs in the environment; as we’ve already seen, these chemicals are in a long list of consumer products from dental floss and fast-food burger wrappers to electronic components and cosmetics—literally thousands of things we all come into contact with each and every day. By now the chemicals are so widely dispersed in the environment that they’ve contaminated the sources of tap water that serve nearly every American, and an estimated 98 percent of us have PFASs in our bodies. They’re inescapable.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page148" title="148"/>That’s a good reason to avoid exposing ourselves to them whenever possible, like in our wardrobes. In some cases, that should be easy—believe it or not, there are garments that actually brag about their Teflon content. So read the labels! Waterproof Gore-Tex garments, including shoes and boots, for example, contain Teflon. So don’t wear those. But you won’t find PFAS listed on clothes’ content labels. That’s why it’s important to avoid wearing <span class="ital">any</span> garments with superpowers, anything that calls itself stain or oil resistant or waterproof.</p>
<p class="TXT">The same goes for no-iron, wrinkle-free, permanent press clothing. That superpower is due to the fact that the fabrics are treated with formaldehyde, the chemical normally associated with embalming fluid. But according to the EPA, the WHO, and several other US and international health agencies, it can cause cancer in those of us who are not dead yet. In one lab experiment, even weak concentrations of formaldehyde, when dissolved in simulated human sweat, increased the proliferation of malignant melanoma cells. You read that right: these chemicals, interacting with sweat, increase the risk of developing melanoma.</p>
<p class="TXT">Formaldehyde can also cause an allergic reaction, called <span class="ital">contact dermatitis</span>, just by lying against the skin. According to a 2010 Government Accountability Office report to Congress, “contact dermatitis affects the immune system and produces reactions characterized by rashes, blisters, and flaky, dry skin that can itch or burn.” You’ll never find the word <span class="ital">formaldehyde</span> on a clothing label. So maybe we should just learn how to iron our clothes (or live with wrinkles).</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">The EPA and several states are taking steps to decrease the amount of PFASs in consumer products. But since these chemicals have lengthy half-lives, they’ll be around us for a long, long time no matter what we do today. They are everywhere in our waterways, meaning that they contaminate the animal and plant life there, too.</p>
<p class="H2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page149" title="149"/>Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">Once upon a time, seafaring men wore clothes made of canvas or cotton coated with wax, linseed oil, or tar to keep water out. Eventually the coating rotted and wore off, but at least they didn’t damage the planet. Believe it or not, it’s still possible to find all-weather clothing that’s treated with wax to keep out water. Sometimes it even comes with extra wax so you can keep it moisture proof. Barring that, we just can just refuse to wear clothing that’s been treated to give it any of the superpowers discussed here. As I said, there’s no mystery involved; the manufacturers boast on the label about all the Fatal Conveniences contained in their clothing. If we buy natural fabrics only and organic whenever possible, we’ll cut out a lot of the guesswork. Beyond that, we can try not to stain our clothes with food or anything else, take along dry socks when we go hiking, and buy and use an iron and ironing board—because there <span class="ital">are</span> no practical, nontoxic alternatives for making clothing that stays dry, resists stains, or refuses to wrinkle.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Convenience: Jeans</p>
<p class="TXF">Of course you look amazing in your tight skinny jeans. If you didn’t, you wouldn’t wear them, right? They’ve been going into and out of style for a long time now—once, fashion victims had to lie down on their beds and suck in their bellies to zip up their skin-tight jeans. Then somebody got the brilliant idea to make denim, which had always been a down-home all-cotton fabric, with rubbery elastane (the generic term for Lycra) fibers mixed in, and voilà! stretch denim, which makes your jeans fit better than ever (meaning tighter, naturally). Excellent! Except for the potential downsides, all of which have been linked to too-tight pants, including:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Urinary tract infections (due to buildup of bacteria thanks to moisture being unable to escape)</li>
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page150" title="150"/>Vaginosis (ditto)</li>
<li>Yeast infections (ditto)</li>
<li>Candidiasis (a fungal infection of the vagina)</li>
<li>Rashes (due to friction)</li>
<li>Low sperm count (caused by excessive heat on the testicles)</li>
<li>Loss of blood flow due to testicular torsion (just what it sounds like)</li>
<li>Acid reflux, abdominal cramps, even meralgia paresthetica, a painful nerve condition afflicting the legs, all caused by clothing-induced lower body compression</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">It’s not just the young and chic who suffer. Middle-aged and older men who reported abdominal distress radiating into their chests, along with unexplained heartburn, were wearing trousers that were too snug. Dr. Octavio Bessa, Jr., saw enough such patients over twenty years to have named the disorder “tight pants syndrome” in an article published in 1993. How did he diagnose it? Simply by measuring patients’ waists and then the waistband of their jeans.</p>
<p class="TXT">Aren’t there safer ways of showing the world what a nice butt you have?</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Jeans have a natural, wholesome, down-to-earth vibe, but from an environmental point of view they’re exactly the opposite. Denim is disastrous partly because it’s so popular—around 450 million pairs of jeans are sold annually in the United States alone. Cotton is a notoriously wasteful and damaging crop, due to the pesticides and GMOs that are used on it. And it takes 3,781 liters of water to make <span class="ital">one pair</span> of jeans. There’s a terrific 2017 documentary about fashion’s pollution of the world’s waterways called <span class="ital">River Blue</span>. In the opening scene, deep magenta wastewater from a factory spills into a river as the Roman designer and environmental activist Orsola de Castro says, “There is a joke in China that you can tell the ‘it’ color of the season by looking at the color of the rivers.” There’s <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page151" title="151"/>actually a photo taken by NASA of China’s Pearl River showing a dark blue streak running right through it.</p>
<p class="TXT">Even after your jeans have been manufactured, they don’t stop polluting. Why do you think the colors fade? Every time we wash our jeans, they release, on average, fifty-six thousand microfibers, nearly invisible strands of material, including microplastics from synthetic textiles, that end up in rivers, the ocean, and elsewhere in the environment. These tiny pieces of your jeans are becoming one of the most prevalent sources of ocean pollution. According to one study conducted by researchers at the University of Toronto, somewhere around one-quarter of all microfibers found in water samples were blue denim. The fibers are found inside fish, so at some point they wind up inside us, too. Scientists even began noticing indigo-colored particles in the Arctic Circle and determined that they had come from denim; that’s how well traveled your jeans are.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">First, if you’re like the average person and already own seven pairs of jeans, you probably don’t need any more. You have better things to do with your money. Second, don’t buy pants that strangle you below the waist. Give your genitals a little breathing room. Third, buy vintage/used/preowned jeans rather than new. They shed less fiber and dye in the wash, and you won’t be adding to new-denim demand.</p>
<p class="TXT">Go online and educate yourself a little about environmentally friendly jeans, ones made with organic cotton and natural dyes. Now even big companies such as Levi’s are selling used or recycled denim pants and jackets. The company Nudie Jeans tries hard to make denim as green as it is blue—by recycling, reusing, repairing, and so on. But don’t stop there; environmentally sensitive denim can be found all over the internet.</p>
<p class="TXT">I recently met a guy named Alberto Candiani in a regenerative cotton field forty-five minutes from my home in California, where he was working with the Rodale Institute. Alberto comes from generations of Italian denim suppliers. Believe me, he knows the truth and is now developing <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page152" title="152"/>a healthy alternative to stretch denim with a 100 percent plant-based, compostable product that will replace elastane. Amazing! I hear about stuff like this all the time, and it gives me hope.</p>
<p class="TXT">A final suggestion: invest in a washing machine filter, which connects to the discharge hose and captures more than 80 percent of microfibers.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Convenience: Polyester</p>
<p class="TXF">Polyester is a totally synthetic petroleum-based plastic, full of toxic chemicals but manufactured to look and feel like cloth—and we wear it on our 100 percent natural skin. Do you see how there might be a problem?</p>
<p class="TXT">Polyester and the other man-made textiles (nylon, acrylic, spandex) are created not just with petroleum but also with acids plus alcohol plus a bunch of other dangerous substances. Sometimes, even coal is used in their manufacture. Each of these, individually, is harmful to the human body. In some cases, they’re carcinogenic. In polyester, all of them are combined. Stop and think a second: We’re wearing clothes made of oil!</p>
<p class="TXT">Are we nuts?</p>
<p class="TXT">We’re dressing our children in it, too! Doesn’t that make you the least bit worried? It scares the hell out of me.</p>
<p class="TXT">The components of polyester and other synthetics are mixed to form a compound known as <span class="ital">monomer</span> or <span class="ital">ester</span>. This chemical reaction is known as <span class="ital">polymerization</span> (hence the name <span class="ital">polyester</span>). The material created during polymerization is extruded while hot into long, extremely strong fibers.</p>
<p class="TXT">It’s no surprise that polyester and other man-made fabrics now outsell cotton and all other natural fibers. As the Council of Fashion Designers of America points out, “Benefits of polyester include durability, versatility, good sunlight resistance, light weight, resistance to wrinkles, resistance to stains, and quick drying time.” It’s hard to argue with that—and the council didn’t even mention the fact that it’s extremely cheap to produce. Polyester is largely responsible for the “fast fashion” explosion of a few years ago that churned out so many low-priced, flimsy garments and did such enormous damage to the environment.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page153" title="153"/>The damage isn’t just from wearing polyester. When you heat it, as in your clothes dryer, it off-gasses the chemicals it contains, spewing them onto the rest of your clothing and, once you open the dryer door, into the air you and your family breathe. Even your body heat releases polyester’s chemicals onto your skin.</p>
<p class="TXT">A study was done of the effects of polyester underwear on male fertility and found that it not only reduced sperm production and motility but even reduced sexual desire! The reason? What the researchers called “electrostatic potentials” created by the fabric. Is that what you want next to your testicles? Maybe you don’t wear synthetic underwear, but the lesson is that polyester clothing can do a lot of invisible damage to a human being. There’s even a skin condition called <span class="ital">polyester allergy</span>, a form of contact dermatitis caused by the chemicals used in making the fabric.</p>
<p class="TXT">Polyester also shows up in everything from upholstery to mattresses to baby bibs (it’s easier to clean than natural fabrics) to auto safety belts, carpeting, and practically anything else made of cloth. Remember, because it’s cheap compared to natural fibers, manufacturers use it eagerly.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">We think of cars and trucks as gas guzzlers that poison the air and support the petroleum industry’s trashing of the planet, but think again—our fashion habits also play a big part. Nearly 70 million barrels of oil are used annually to make synthetic textiles—11 million tons of polyester a year and an estimated half-million tons of plastic microfibers are shed into the oceans annually during the washing of polyester, nylon, and the rest. The polyester garments we discard end up in landfills, where they will take more than two hundred years to break down. If you threw away your polyester leisure suit from the 1970s, it’s going to be around for a couple of centuries. Maybe by then disco will be back.</p>
<p class="TXT">Think of every cheap, flimsy Halloween costume you’ve ever seen (or worn). What do you think they were made of? Imagine the huge dump of toxic costumes every November 1!</p>
<p class="H2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page154" title="154"/>Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">Obviously, the best choice is to avoid all man-made fabrics. Done!</p>
<p class="TXT">If that’s impractical, you can stick with ethical versions, meaning recycled. Patagonia began using fabric made from plastic soda bottles back in the 1990s. Parley for the Oceans created Ocean Plastic, materials for the sports, fashion, and luxury industries made of intercepted and upcycled marine plastic debris. (It also creates informative and beautiful video content, which can be found on its YouTube channel.) And Amur uses recycled polyester to create high-end evening wear.</p>
<p class="TXT">There are also some cool young designers who take leftover fabric from big apparel manufacturers—wasted material that would otherwise end up in landfills—and turn it into garments. That’s good news. Fashion industry “upcycling” also repurposes used fabric and even remakes old clothes. Still, it doesn’t happen often enough to offset the new garments constantly being churned out. Supporting environmentally aware designers is a good start to making a change. Our buying choices really matter!</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Convenience: Children’s Clothing</p>
<p class="TXF">The first thing to keep in mind whenever we discuss children and Fatal Conveniences is this obvious fact: kids are small. Tiny, you could say.</p>
<p class="TXT">This means any toxic exposure that might harm us is going to be doubly dangerous to them. They’re in the early stages of physical and mental development, so their growing brains, bones, and organs are more vulnerable than ours. Their immune systems aren’t yet up to full strength. Their reproductive systems are immature and in greater danger than ours from chemicals known to be hormone disruptors. Their skin is softer and thinner than ours, so it’s more likely to absorb whatever rubs up against it.</p>
<p class="TXT">It’s common sense, then: we need to be even more vigilant with our children’s clothing than we are with our own. But are we? Not that I can tell.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page155" title="155"/>A landmark study of chemical content in children’s clothing was done by the Washington State Department of Ecology. Researchers tested every kind of garment imaginable, from shirts and pants to underwear and socks to pajamas and coats. Here’s what they discovered.</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Antimony, the number one toxin on the list, a metal and known carcinogen, showed up in 72 percent of the samples analyzed. It’s usually in printed fabrics—in other words, all those cute shirts, socks, and pajamas featuring cartoon characters, unicorns, or puppies. It’s also present in clothing treated with flame retardants, common in kiddie pajamas. Today, many large retailers and manufacturers have banned flame retardants because of their antimony content, but not all. Antimony is also found in plastic bibs, which make for easy cleanup but are bad for babies’ health.</li>
<li>The researchers discovered other metals in the clothing, too: lead (which causes brain damage and developmental disorders), as well as cobalt, arsenic, cadmium, mercury, and molybdenum, all of which also pose health hazards.</li>
<li>One-third of the garments tested contained phthalates, chemicals used to soften plastics. They’re in literally thousands of consumer products, everything from cosmetics to vinyl flooring—pretty much anywhere plastic is found. These chemicals have been proven to decrease testosterone production and impair the development of the male reproductive organs, something to keep in mind if you want grandchildren someday.</li>
<li>Phthalates also affect the development of children’s brains, putting them at higher risk for learning, behavioral, and attention disorders. In 2017, the federal government banned the use of phthalates in children’s toys and other products, but for some reason not in their clothing. Remember this, too, when you’re feeding the little one: phthalates are used in making plastic food containers, and they leach into the food.</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page156" title="156"/>A follow-up report to that study, titled “Chemicals Revealed: The State of Chemicals in Children’s Products,” by Toxic-Free Future, identified more than five thousand widely available products, including not only shoes and clothing but also car seats, bedding, and arts and crafts supplies, that contain one or more of sixty-six “chemicals of high concern to children.”</p>
<p class="TXT">In addition, children’s clothing, just like what we adults wear, often contains the “forever chemicals,” PFASs, that make our garments waterproof or stain resistant, something that sounds particularly useful for kids. But as I mentioned previously, they’re linked to kidney and testicular cancer, liver damage, and a long list of other serious ailments.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">I’ll refrain from sounding the same alarms over and over; basically the environmental issues are the same (except maybe in smaller sizes).</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">When possible, buy organic cotton or other natural fiber garments. That includes bibs, despite the fact that a cotton bib is harder to keep clean than one made of plastic. Avoid anything stain resistant, wrinkle free, or waterproof, all of which contain chemicals that are dangerous for humans of all ages. Especially beware of flame-retardant clothes. I know I’m suggesting that you create a lot of work for yourself, but when it comes to keeping your kids and their clothes clean and healthy, it’s worth it.</p>
<p class="TXT">Another good idea is to dress your child in hand-me-downs (as lots of parents do already, since the little tykes outgrow their clothes long before they wear out). At least some of the toxins will already have been washed out.</p>
<p class="H1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page157" title="157"/>Fatal Convenience: Cotton T-Shirt</p>
<p class="TXF">It’s so soft, friendly, and comfortable, so stylish yet simple and timeless—it’s the universal garment, the one thing worn by every human being no matter how old or young, rich or poor, fashionable or clueless. It started out as men’s underwear and took off because it’s so easy to care for and looks so good. It doesn’t matter if we bought it in a three-pack at the drugstore or paid hundreds of dollars for it at some chi-chi boutique. It’s maybe the only thing everyone in the world can agree on: we love cotton T-shirts.</p>
<p class="TXT">Yet behind those lovable garments there’s a world of hurt being done: to the environment, to the workers who make them, and even to those of us wearing them. We may love T-shirts, but they sure don’t love us back.</p>
<p class="TXT">The cotton T-shirt is a perfect example of a truth that applies pretty much to every single thing I’m writing about in this book. The personal and the environmental are one and the same: if a thing is harmful to our bodies, it’s bad for the environment; if it contaminates the air, the water, the soil, or wildlife, it’s contaminating us as well. The story of the T-shirt is a good reminder that we are part of nature, the same as any tree or fish or sea. People discuss “the environment” as though it’s something separate from us. But it’s not. There’s not a bit of difference.</p>
<p class="TXT">We believe that anything made of cotton must be okay, for the simple reason that it’s a natural fiber that comes from a plant. That’s true as far as it goes, but most of the time we don’t wear it as nature made it.</p>
<p class="TXT">First, nearly all cotton used in clothing has been sprayed with pesticides, some of which are carcinogenic or cause reproductive problems in humans. In fact, cotton farming is a major guilty party in the worldwide pesticide crisis. In the United States, 97 percent of the crop is grown with the aid of toxic agricultural chemicals. Globally, one-quarter of all pesticides are used on cotton fields.</p>
<p class="TXT">Second, it takes a huge amount of fresh water to grow enough cotton <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page158" title="158"/>to make a T-shirt. In some parts of the world drought is always a threat. But of course, cash crops drink first.</p>
<p class="TXT">Then the cotton has to be processed and dyed. The textiles used in T-shirts are treated with the same toxic chemicals used on all other types of fabric. In total, eight thousand different chemicals are used in various stages of T-shirt production. We wearers have no idea which ones, except we know that the worst of them—PFOAs, phthalates, formaldehyde—are used in pretty much all industrial fabric manufacture.</p>
<p class="TXT">As I started this chapter by saying, once upon a time all our clothing was dyed using plants, minerals, even insects. Now tinting is strictly synthetic; according to research conducted for the World Bank, seventy-two toxic chemicals are used in fabric dyeing alone. Azo dyes make up between 60 and 80 percent of colorants used today. They are synthetic, nitrogen based, and release chemicals called aromatic amines, which can also be found in pesticides and are carcinogenic. They have been banned in the European Union, Japan, China, Vietnam, and India. These chemicals have been found to cause skin problems, which is no wonder considering how much time they spend rubbing against our skin, our largest organ. They are absorbed as they lie against our skin for prolonged periods.</p>
<p class="TXT">Perfluorinated chemicals, such as formaldehyde and chlorinated paraffin, are used in the finishing water rinse. They are neurotoxins, endocrine disruptors, carcinogens, and bioaccumulative, meaning that they build up inside our bodies. Chlorine, another toxic chemical, is used for whitening cotton. It can cause breathing problems, even asthma.</p>
<p class="TXT">The fact that nearly all T-shirts are made in the developing world tells you that workers’ safety is not a top priority and working conditions are probably worse—more dangerous, more toxic—than they would be in developed countries. Not only is workers’ health disregarded, but the health of the environment is ignored, too.</p>
<p class="TXT">All those dyes and chemicals used to make our T-shirts? They don’t degrade. Instead, they go into the land and into the waterways outside the factories, where they form a toxic film that blocks out light, killing animal <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page159" title="159"/>and plant life. These chemicals then make their way from the water to the food chain; chemicals from dyes have been found in vegetables and fruits.</p>
<p class="TXT">None of this is unique to T-shirts, of course. But it’s the shirts’ popularity that makes them such a threat to human, animal, and plant life. Can you guess how many T-shirts are sold all around the world in just one year? Two billion!</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">Stop wearing T-shirts? That’ll never happen, but you can make them less of a scourge. You can try to stop buying so many of them. Or you can buy used instead. In many ways, shopping vintage is the best way to attack the problem of waste in fashion; the most sustainable piece is one that doesn’t have to be made in the first place.</p>
<p class="TXT">Even better (and cheaper), you can wear hand-me-downs. Just the other day I went online and bought some upcycled vintage Harley T-shirts. Time has off-gassed all the chemicals. Buying them did two nice things for me: I felt good purchasing a vintage shirt, and it reminded me of my dad because we rode our Harleys together. (And the fact I am writing this book for you is because of him. It’s really all connected!)</p>
<p class="TXT">If you must buy new, wear only organic cotton. Aside from not using pesticides, it requires a lot less water to process than conventional cotton does.</p>
<p class="TXT">Some companies now take old T-shirts and either repair them, turn them into something else, or recycle the fabric. As you might expect, their products are some of the finest-looking shirts you can find. The fact that they’re made by creative people who are trying to protect the planet—which also means protecting you and me—only makes the clothes cooler.</p>
<p class="TXT">Look for the Global Organic Textile Standard (GOTS) or OEKO-TEX certification on clothing labels, as these organizations prohibit the use of toxic chemicals in the clothing they certify. GOTS takes things a step further by considering the fiber source and other layers of production; it’s really the platinum standard for a truly sustainable <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page160" title="160"/>textile, from the farm to the finished product. Also check out Cradle to Cradle Certified, an initiative that came out of William McDonough and Michael Braungart’s now-classic book <span class="ital">Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way We Make Things</span>. It measures material health, as well as social justice, material reuse, renewable energy, and water stewardship.</p>
<p class="TXT">Look closely at brand websites to understand their chemical policies. Target announced a chemical reduction policy with the goal of full ingredient transparency (including fragrances). It is also removing PFCs and flame retardants across its product lines. Other mission-driven brands active in pursuing safer and more ethical manufacturing practices include Outerknown, Stella McCartney, Patagonia, Mara Hoffman, Eileen Fisher, Prana, and Coyuchi. Fully transparent companies make their fiber and chemical strategies easily available on their websites.</p>
<p class="TXT">Throughout this book, my advice is limited mostly to things we can do as individuals to protect ourselves from harmful products. But we can also take action on a bigger scale by urging companies to do better. You may think they don’t listen, but in fact they do, because they figure that for every person who gets in touch to complain, there are many more who feel the same but never bother to say so.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Bras</p>
<p class="TXF">Bras may not seem exactly like conveniences, and for many women they’re just the opposite: inconvenient, uncomfortable, and unwanted but necessary. Or so we’ve been led to believe. They’ve been around since sometime in the fourteenth century, starting out as a simple bandeau, a band of fabric worn over the breasts. Obviously, they’ve come a long way since then, though not necessarily to anyone’s benefit, especially not the wearers’.</p>
<p class="TXT">You have chest muscles that support your breasts, but can you guess what happens when you wear a bra? The muscles no longer have to do their job, and that’s not good; nonuse weakens them. That’s why some experts say that wearing a bra actually causes breast tissue to sag more than it would if those muscles had been working all along.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page161" title="161"/>The problems go beyond that. The synthetic fabric in your bra may have been treated with formaldehyde, which is carcinogenic and can also cause a rash. The fact that the garment is one that you wear tight against your skin, in a place that’s warm and moist, means you are increasing the risk of skin irritation. With the rise of athleisure wear came the popularity of the sports bra, a garment that is, in a way, a no-frills throwback to the original bandeau. But it still contains spandex and other synthetic materials.</p>
<p class="TXT">The difficulty in finding a bra of the proper size is a common complaint. I recently saw a statistic that 80 percent of women are wearing the wrong size. But the problem goes beyond simple discomfort. Wearing a tight bra all day has actually been associated with an increased risk of developing breast cancer. And there’s something called Mondor’s disease, an inflammation of the veins in the breast and chest wall, that may be caused by wearing ill-fitting bras.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">There’s nothing inherently worse about bras than everything else in this chapter. The same toxic chemicals found in other apparel are in bras, too, and have the same impact on the health of the planet when they are made of synthetic materials that are thrown away and add to the pollution.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">Start by asking yourself: Do you really need to ever wear a bra? If the answer is yes, make sure you’re wearing the right size, meaning one that does the job without hurting you. And try leaving it off for as long as you feel comfortable going without. Your chest muscles will grow stronger, and your breasts will benefit. In what might be the only benefit of covid, many women worked from home instead of the office, at which point bras became pointless, pun totally intended.</p>
<p class="TXT">Buy bras made with natural fibers only—organic cotton, hemp, or <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page162" title="162"/>silk—and free of chemicals such as formaldehyde. Padded and push-up bras are probably stuffed with polyester or some other synthetic fabric, so maybe it’s time to give those up. Steer clear of underwire bras, especially if you’re nursing, because they may impede the milk glands. Since your breasts change over the course of your menstrual cycle, you may need bras in more than one size.</p>
<p class="TXT">Here’s a final bit of advice: If you’re not already doing strength training of your upper body muscles, it’s time to begin. You’ll be healthier overall, and your pecs will do a better job of supporting your breasts.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Conveniences: Disposable Diapers</p>
<p class="TXF">Sure, newborns are cute, sweet, and lovable, but they have an extremely inconvenient habit: they pee and poop whenever they feel like, and it’s our job to deal with it. This has always been the case, though it wasn’t until the 1500s that diapers appeared on the scene. Tell young people today how parents managed back in the age of cloth diapers, and they’ll stare at you in shock. <span class="ital">Yuck!</span></p>
<p class="TXT">Only in the early 1960s did we start making use of what seemed like a brilliant solution: disposable diapers. Parents heaved a great sigh of relief. But baby? Probably not.</p>
<p class="TXT">Disposable diapers have a challenging job: they must fit snugly and stay on an active infant, contain whatever the child unleashes, and then store it securely in a layer of absorbent material a safe distance from baby’s skin. Some feature fragrance, moisturizer, even a wetness indicator. To do all that, they require a long list of synthetic materials: adhesives, plastics, polymers, chemicals including phthalates, chlorine, and dyes. There may be some natural fiber in there as well, such as cotton, which indicates the likely presence of pesticides.</p>
<p class="TXT">Keep in mind that a baby will be wearing one of these things wrapped tightly around his or her most delicate parts twenty-four hours a day for about two years. (The average baby goes through around two thousand <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page163" title="163"/>diapers annually, fueling a $71-billion-a-year industry.) That’s an intense exposure to a mystery mix of who knows what. The federal Consumer Products Safety Commission doesn’t require manufacturers to test diapers for safety. There’s not even a requirement to list the substances they’re made from. So we’re on our own.</p>
<p class="TXT">The authors of a study published in the journal <span class="ital">Reproductive Technology</span> in 2019 tested four different brands of diapers and detected the volatile organic compounds (VOCs) toluene and xylene, both of which are known reproductive toxicants and can be absorbed through the skin—in all four. As a reminder, VOCs are organic compounds that are released into the air even at room temperature, meaning that we’re all unknowingly breathing them in during the course of daily living. According to the researchers, “the physical location of the exposure site, the high absorption rate of the genitalia for chemicals, and the long-term exposure period” are all cause for serious concern.</p>
<p class="TXT">Because diapers contain phthalates to make the plastic lining softer and more pliable, they can cause dermatitis and rashes. According to one study, two phthalates in particular—DBP and DEHP—were in all brands of diapers tested. Both are classified by California regulators as reproductive and developmental toxicants. A French governmental agency tested disposable diapers and found formaldehyde and the notorious pesticide glyphosate, also known as Roundup, which I mentioned earlier in the book and is maybe the most lethal chemical ever used in agriculture. Both those chemicals are cancer causing.</p>
<p class="TXT">Glyphosate? In diapers?</p>
<p class="TXT">A final scary thing about disposable diapers is that they contain hormone disruptors. In the journal <span class="ital">Environmental Science and Technology</span>, it was reported that the plastics used in disposable diapers were found to be capable of raising levels of estrogen and lowering those of male hormones—not just in the lab but in human subjects. That’s not a great start in life for your child.</p>
<p class="H2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page164" title="164"/>How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">Disposable diapers are the third largest consumer item found in landfills. They generate sixty times as much solid waste as reusable diapers, require twenty times as many raw materials, including crude oil and wood pulp, and will take five hundred years to decompose. Disposable diapers even contain traces of dioxin, a cancer-causing by-product of the paper-bleaching process. And although human waste goes through sewage treatment systems, diapers go straight into landfills, where at some point the feces they contain will leach into the earth and eventually into our water supply.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">You probably won’t want to hear this, but it would be healthier for everyone if you used cloth diapers rather than putting disposable ones made of toxic substances against your baby’s delicate flesh. Cloth diapers aren’t without their own environmental cost, I understand. Cotton agriculture uses huge amounts of water and pesticides and has a hefty carbon footprint. But a cloth diaper can be reused anywhere between fifty and two hundred times. If you buy diapers made of organic cotton, even better. There’s no such thing as a recycled disposable diaper, at least not yet.</p>
<p class="TXT">If you’re not prepared to go that route, here are some suggestions from the Environmental Working Group’s guide to safe diapers. Among its recommendations:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Read the packaging closely for a list of the diapers’ contents, and if there’s no such information, don’t buy them.</li>
<li>Don’t use diapers containing dye, fragrance, lotion, or any other extra, unnecessary features.</li>
<li>Choose brands that use unbleached pulp or pulp bleached without using chlorine.</li>
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page165" title="165"/>Choose brands that specify no use of phthalates, parabens, or bisphenols—all of which are PFAS chemicals—or flame retardants.</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">EWG verifies safe disposable diaper brands. For more information on those, go to ewg.org.</p>
<p class="TXT">You should also consider going without baby wipes. They are hugely popular, I realize, but are bad for your child, your sewer system, and the world. Not so long ago, disposable diapers and baby wipes didn’t even exist, and somehow we survived.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Convenience: Spandex</p>
<p class="TXF">If your clothes stretch and cling in all the right places and make you look shapely, thank spandex. Also known as Lycra, the brand name dreamed up by DuPont back in the 1950s, or elastane, it’s a synthetic concoction manufactured in a complicated chemical process. Mostly it’s made of polyurethane, which is a cousin of plastic (for me to explain any further, we’d both need an advanced degree in chemistry). Polyurethane is one of the man-made substances found everywhere, from varnish and insulation to upholstery and bedding.</p>
<p class="TXT">In apparel, it was popular first in girdles and, once those fell out of fashion, in women’s swimwear and athleisure wear (which everyone now wears both in and out of the gym and yoga studio). Today, stretchiness is in style in jeans, fine wool, cotton, and other fabrics, all of which contain some portion (usually not more than 20 percent) of spandex. It’s listed clearly on labels, so we don’t have to guess.</p>
<p class="TXT">The downside is the same as the upside: garments made with spandex fit so snugly that the skin can’t breathe, moisture gets trapped, and heat builds up. That increases the risk of infections and rashes, including ringworm, which isn’t as disgusting as it sounds (no worms are involved; the rash resembles rings on your skin) but still is no fun. Spandex also raises the risk of developing yeast infections and other types of inflammation caused by bacteria or fungus. And of course, when your body heat rises <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page166" title="166"/>in the gym or on the track, more of the chemicals in your clothing are released—right onto your skin.</p>
<p class="TXT">Is there any scientific proof that spandex actually causes serious ailments? No. However, as I’ve asked over and over, do you really want to subject your body to hazardous chemicals if you can avoid them?</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">There’s no evidence that spandex workers are in any particular danger from their jobs, although studying its health hazards isn’t high on any researchers’ list of priorities. But keep in mind that every time you wash anything containing spandex, microparticles are shed and enter our waterways and ultimately wildlife and our water supply. Plus, the fact that the material is 100 percent industrial chemicals means that today’s cool and flattering yoga pants will someday end up as more toxic trash making the world a nastier place to live. Around 60 percent of the trash in US waterways is composed of nonbiodegradable textile fibers, and spandex garments and fibers are part of that.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">Obviously, just don’t wear spandex or anything containing it unless it’s completely unavoidable. It’s going to be a challenge for women to find natural fiber swimsuits that do the job, I realize. Some health-conscious companies make them in organic cotton or hemp, but even those need a little spandex content or they’d sag and slip right off in the water. Still, they’re a better option than most bathing suits, which are made totally of synthetics such as polyester or nylon <span class="ital">plus</span> spandex—a really bad combo.</p>
<p class="TXT">For the gym or yoga studio you can certainly find cotton garments containing just a little spandex (5 percent or even less) or none at all. But as a general rule, because your body heat will release some of the toxic chemicals your workout clothes contain, the less stretchy your outfits are, the better.</p>
<p class="H1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page167" title="167"/>Fatal Convenience: Dry Cleaning</p>
<p class="TXF">Even though it costs more than washing clothes at home, dropping them off at the dry cleaner’s and getting them back fresh, pressed, and looking like new is hard to beat. But what we gain in ease we pay for in exposure to dangerous cancer-causing chemicals, both on the clothing itself and in our environment—to the point where the EPA is currently making an effort to abolish the chemicals that nearly all dry cleaners use.</p>
<p class="TXT">“Dry” is a misnomer, of course, and has been since ancient Romans cleaned stubborn dirt from their togas using ammonia derived from urine. Since then, a variety of petroleum-based fluids, including gasoline, kerosene, and turpentine, has been used, and they did the job well. But once cleaners started using electrical machines, they ran into a problem: the solvents kept catching fire.</p>
<p class="TXT">Starting in the 1930s, our clothes have been cleaned using the chloride-based chemical tetrachloroethylene or perchloroethylene—PCE or PERC for short. It does the job, but it’s nasty stuff; according to various studies, it’s a respiratory and skin irritant, liver and kidney toxicant, and reproductive and developmental toxicant. PCE is considered to be a potential carcinogen for workers; the International Agency for Research on Cancer has termed it “probably carcinogenic to humans.” Long-term exposure to PCE is especially risky for the brain; it’s been associated with impaired memory, confusion, dizziness, headaches, drowsiness, even the development of color blindness.</p>
<p class="TXT">Here’s what’s worrisome even for us consumers: a 2011 study at Georgetown University published in <span class="ital">Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry</span> found that PCE remains on dry-cleaned clothing, especially on wool, polyester, and cotton (though not silk), and that it builds up on garments rather than evaporating over time, which is why some wearers eventually develop contact dermatitis. The research also showed that PCE is “volatilized from these fabrics under ambient room air conditions,” meaning that you inhale toxic fumes emanating from your nice clean clothing.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page168" title="168"/>As I’ve said before, don’t be deceived by the fact that the chemical exposure is relatively small. Scientists agree that we still don’t know how the human body responds to the various combinations of untested industrial substances we ingest, inhale, and otherwise come into contact with in our daily lives.</p>
<p class="TXT">There have been attempts to replace PCE with other chemicals, but these have also proven to be toxic. There are two alternative technologies, however, that have been found to be both effective and safe. One uses liquid carbon dioxide in high-pressure machines and with specialized detergents. This gets clothes clean, with no known harm to humans. The other is professional wet cleaning, or PWC, which also uses high-tech machinery, water, and gentle detergents to do the job, with no damage to the health of consumers, workers, or the environment.</p>
<p class="TXT">The main drawback of both these methods is financial—it’s expensive to switch over from the machinery that uses PCE. And the dry-cleaning industry is made up mostly of small operators, who are in no position to spend big bucks on fancy new equipment. Since the EPA began efforts to phase out the use of PCE, several local and state governments have begun subsidizing dry cleaners’ efforts to make the switch.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">There are more than twenty-five thousand dry cleaners in the United States, and nearly all of them use PCE. Workers have been tested with dangerously high levels of the chemical in their blood, and some communities have been contaminated by the chemical. California has committed to phasing out the use of PCE altogether, and the EPA has already ordered that no cleaners located in residential apartment buildings can continue using it. The agency is headed toward banning the chemical altogether—eventually. By then, however, a great deal of damage will have been done. We can’t afford to wait on officials to remove PCE and other powerful solvents from our lives.</p>
<p class="H2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page169" title="169"/>Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">Whenever possible, don’t buy garments that say “Dry clean only.” Often, these will be made from synthetic fabrics, so you’re doing two good deeds at once.</p>
<p class="TXT">Wash fine wool and cashmere knits at home, gently, by hand—remember, before you bought them they were being worn by sheep and goats, who weren’t harmed by soap and water. The garments will also last longer if they are not subjected to harsh chemicals, they will smell better, and they will be softer than if you dry-clean them.</p>
<p class="TXT">After wearing your clothes, let them air out, preferably in sunlight, rather than automatically taking them to be dry-cleaned. If there’s a stain, try using a spot remover; it’s not necessary to get the whole garment cleaned for every little smudge.</p>
<p class="TXT">If something absolutely must be dry-cleaned, try to find a place that uses one of the green alternatives, liquid carbon dioxide or professional wet cleaning (PWC). Look online, but keep in mind that such cleaners are not found everywhere yet. Be wary of any other solvent-based methods that claim to be environmentally friendly, because they probably aren’t.</p>
<p class="TXT">Another thing, a side issue: ask your dry cleaner to stop putting your clothes into plastic bags. How good for the planet can they be? And you’re not likely to get the clothes dirty on the way home.</p>
<p class="H1">Fatal Convenience: Leather</p>
<p class="TXF">I’m going to be straight with you: there’s not really much evidence that leather is harmful to people who wear it. Around 1 percent might suffer from chromium dermatitis because the chemical used in tanning leather rubs off onto their skin. There’s not a lot for the rest of us to worry about. After all, leather is a natural fabric. We’ve been wearing it for thousands of years. When ancient hunters killed, they used every bit of their prey: skin, bone, muscle, organs, tendons, hoofs, and horns, the works. There was a kind of honor expressed in that attitude.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page170" title="170"/>Obviously, it was on a totally different scale than the current global trade in animal hides. Today, the manufacturing and use of leather, which is anything but honorable, do enormous damage in three main ways.</p>
<p class="TXT">First, there’s the terrible impact on the environment from the processes used to turn hides into clothing, upholstery, and so on. Dead skin would rot if left untreated. Once, a vegetable-based tanning method was used, but today chromium is the main chemical preserving leather for consumer wear. Formaldehyde, coal-tar derivatives, and numerous oils, dyes, and finishes, some of them cyanide based, are also employed. All those chemicals, once used, enter our waterways.</p>
<p class="TXT">Second, working in a leather tannery is an extremely hazardous way to make a living. Once, there were tanneries all over the United States, nasty places to work in or live near due to the toxic chemicals used in the process. Now most leather comes from China and India, so for us the toll on the environment and on workers’ health is out of sight and therefore out of mind, sad to say.</p>
<p class="TXT">Tannery workers suffer from higher-than-normal rates of respiratory problems from inhaling leather dust, as well as other serious disorders caused by inhaling the solvents and other chemicals used in the processing. Today, these workers are mostly in poor Asian countries, and if they were able to find safer work, they no doubt would do so. Instead, they get sick and die so we can have plenty of leather. Even people who live near the plants reportedly have elevated levels of leukemia.</p>
<p class="TXT">“Tanning is one of the most toxic industries in the world because of the chemicals involved,” according to Ecologist, an environmental news website. “Chrome, known for its cancer-causing abilities, is used in huge amounts as are acids, natrium and ammonium salts. A 2005 study showed 69,000 tons of chrome salts are used annually in 1,600 Indian tanneries. But despite the dangers, workers can still be seen labouring without adequate protective gear.”</p>
<p class="TXT">And third, all that is bad enough. But there’s something even more sickening.</p>
<p class="TXT">I’m encouraged to see how many people today are either giving up <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page171" title="171"/>meat altogether or eating less of it. For some, it’s about health. For others, it’s because of the huge carbon footprint and other degradations of the planet caused by the livestock industry.</p>
<p class="TXT">But for many, it’s because they can no longer support the torture and slaughter of defenseless animals. I applaud that, but here’s what somehow is forgotten: anything made of leather or suede—jackets, pants, shoes, handbags, luggage, your dog’s collar, your child’s football, all the rest—also requires that animals be held from birth in filthy, disgusting confinement and then killed for profit.</p>
<p class="TXT">Eating beef, pork, or lamb . . . wearing leather or suede . . . there’s no difference. It blows my mind—people who would never think of wearing fur have no problem with leather, even though it’s also part of a living creature that we turn into adornment.</p>
<p class="TXT">The softest leathers come from the youngest animals, such as newborn calves. They are even cut from their mothers’ wombs for their skins. In some cases, the hides do not even come from the advertised sources. In China, dogs and cats are killed for their skins, which are then fraudulently sold to us as conventional leather (trade in those animals’ hides is illegal in the United States). The poor creatures are sometimes even skinned alive, because it’s cheaper than killing them humanely.</p>
<p class="TXT">That’s the Fatal Convenience here—we conveniently forget that if we want to wear leather, animals must first suffer and die.</p>
<p class="TXT">As someone who loves all animals, I can’t imagine why anyone needs to kill a fellow living being just to wear its skin. I am not back in the 1800s living rough on the plains of Minnesota, needing to wear fur to stay alive. I don’t need to kill for my clothing, and neither do you.</p>
<p class="H2">How About the Environment?</p>
<p class="TXF">By now, we’re all familiar with the toll that animal farming takes on the planet. It’s responsible for the deforestation of the Amazon basin, which is contributing to global pollution as well as the habitat loss of millions of species. The damage is done here at home, too. Raising animals for <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page172" title="172"/>slaughter comes with a huge carbon footprint; it requires agricultural crops (and heavy pesticide use) to feed the animals and leaves behind vast lakes of excrement that befoul the country.</p>
<p class="H2">Okay, So What Should We Do?</p>
<p class="TXF">Stop buying new leather garments and other products. If you really must wear leather, shop at vintage stores. Even better, try one of the several kinds of nonanimal “leather” already in use, with more being developed all the time. I’m talking about fabrics made from used coffee grounds, seashells, pineapple fibers, algae, or mycelium (threads from mushroom roots). They all fall under the heading of “vegan leather,” and they look, feel, and wear like the real thing. Years ago, while I was working on a water purification project in an African village, a man showed me a tree with bark that looked and felt exactly like leather. So you see, there are many choices out there—without the cruelty or the pollution.</p>
<p class="H1">Postscript</p>
<p class="TXF">We hardly ever think of our fashion habits when we worry about our impact on the environment. I hope you see now that that’s a big mistake. There are plenty of steps we can take, even as clothing consumers, to protect our planet and ourselves. Here are two of them.</p>
<p class="TXT">Number one: Pay attention to what you buy and wear! Just keep reminding yourself that your personal choices really do make a difference.</p>
<p class="TXT">Number two: Buy fewer clothes.</p>
<p class="TXT">According to one estimate, the average American purchases more than sixty garments a year, including shoes. More than one a week! I truly dislike shopping for clothes and do it only when absolutely necessary, so there must be someone out there who is buying both his or her share <span class="ital">and</span> mine. The fact is that right now, the world has more than enough apparel to clothe us all, without a single new item ever being produced.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page173" title="173"/>Ever!</p>
<p class="TXT">I get it, sometimes we need new things, and many people take great pleasure in clothes shopping and buying. But we can all begin showing a little restraint. Even skipping just a few purchases will make a difference. Next time, before you decide to buy something new, ask yourself if your life will really suffer if you abstain. Chances are the answer will be no. If we all do this occasionally, we’ll make an immediate positive change.</p>
<p class="TXT">We can also start buying vintage, preowned, or used apparel, call it whatever you like. Right now this is a huge and hopeful trend, especially among young people. Once, this was the specialty of Goodwill and Salvation Army stores serving shoppers who needed to be extra careful with their budgets. Today, almost every city and town all over the world has shops devoted to cool vintage clothing and home furnishings. There’s also a vast online world of chic and fashionable marketplaces where you can buy and even rent used designer garments. Obviously, buying used clothes cuts down on the environmental damage caused by apparel manufacture, which we’ve already discussed: the staggering need for water; the pesticides used to grow conventional cotton; the toxic chemicals needed to treat, bleach, and dye textiles; the plastics and petroleum products contained in synthetic fabrics.</p>
<p class="TXT">This trend is part of the growing awareness of how all our buying habits affect the environment. It’s a far more sustainable way of shopping than buying everything brand new. It’s a way to do good while indulging your taste for stylish looks. Meanwhile, “fast fashion,” ultracheap clothing meant to be worn for a little while, then discarded, is falling <span class="ital">out</span> of fashion. That’s a very good sign. In fact, it’s being replaced by something called “slow fashion,” a movement where high style meets environmental awareness.</p>
<p class="TXT">Or rent your wardrobe; the pioneer at this, Rent the Runway, is now a billion-dollar business, and there are others, too.</p>
<p class="TXT">When you absolutely must buy new clothing, there’s a long list of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page174" title="174"/>manufacturers who specialize in environmentally sensitive goods, made responsibly and in ways that also treat textile workers ethically. Garments of natural materials and nontoxic manufacturing processes are some of the coolest-looking clothes on the planet. It’s worth the extra effort to find them.</p>
</body>
</html>