<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Fatal Conveniences</title>
  <link href="../Styles/FatalConveniences.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1096cf69-c1c2-4b94-ac1d-5d952fe64055" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<p class="CN"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH001"><span class="blue"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page3" title="3"/>1</span></a></p>
<p class="CT"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH001"><span class="blue">What Is a Fatal Convenience?</span></a></p>
<p class="TXFF"><span class="boldsc">LET’S START WITH A PARTIAL LIST,</span> just so you know what’s in store.</p>
<p class="List-TT">Personal care products, like:</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>Soap and bodywash</li>
<li>Shampoo</li>
<li>Fragrance</li>
<li>Moisturizer and skin lotion</li>
<li>Antiaging creams</li>
<li>Petroleum jelly</li>
<li>Cosmetics</li>
<li>Tampons</li>
<li>Shaving cream</li>
<li>Sunscreen</li>
<li>Deodorant</li>
<li>Toothpaste</li>
<li>Mouthwash</li>
</ul>
<p class="List-TT">Household items, including:</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>Laundry detergent</li>
<li>Dryer sheets</li>
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page4" title="4"/>Furniture</li>
<li>Carpeting</li>
<li>Air-conditioning</li>
<li>Bedding</li>
<li>Cleaning products</li>
<li>Air fresheners</li>
<li>Cookware</li>
<li>Plastic containers</li>
<li>Aluminum foil</li>
<li>Plastic wrap</li>
</ul>
<p class="List-TT">Electronic devices, like:</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>Microwave ovens</li>
<li>Modems and Wi-Fi</li>
<li>Computers and tablets</li>
<li>Cell phones</li>
<li>Bluetooth headphones</li>
</ul>
<p class="List-TT">Food and drink, including:</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>Snack foods</li>
<li>Nonorganic produce</li>
<li>Conventionally raised meat and poultry</li>
<li>Nutritional supplements</li>
<li>Energy drinks</li>
<li>Dairy products</li>
<li>Bottled water and other beverages</li>
</ul>
<p class="List-TT">And some random things you might never suspect, such as:</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>Jeans</li>
<li>Dental floss</li>
<li>Dry cleaning chemicals</li>
<li>Diapers</li>
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page5" title="5"/>Fast-food wrappers</li>
<li>T-shirts</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">This includes a lot of stuff we all use every day, right?</p>
<p class="TXT">The list of Fatal Conveniences is almost endless, and it constantly grows longer as new products and novel substances are introduced into the marketplace and our homes and lives. There are so many more, but this is a good start on the major ones.</p>
<p class="TXT">Over the past fifty or so years, more than 80,000 chemicals have been introduced into our environment, and the vast majority weren’t tested first to see if they were safe for human contact. We know for a fact that at least 1,500 of them are suspected of being carcinogenic. Many times—more often than not—we don’t even know that these substances are contained in the things we use every day.</p>
<p class="TXT">How insane is that? We’re buying them, eating them, putting them onto our skin, bringing them into our homes, but what exactly are they? Most of the time, we have no idea!</p>
<p class="TXT">In lots of cases, the damage isn’t even created by the convenience itself. It’s caused by a hidden, unnoticed ingredient that comes along for the ride: The preservative. The propellant. The flavoring. The dye. The emulsifier. The thickener. The lining of the container. The completely unnecessary fragrance that’s there only to make you love the product a little more. The carcinogenic pesticide used in farming that’s a shortcut for the big agriculture conglomerates. The sugar under an unrecognizable name. The harm that is done is often like the shadow of the thing, the aura, the invisible residue that it leaves behind. It’s extra dangerous because we don’t even know it’s there.</p>
<p class="TXT">Want a good example? You are probably unaware that a chemical from the same family as Teflon is used on clothing so that it won’t be wrinkled after you wash it. Cool! Great idea. The only problem is that the chemical sometimes causes skin irritation, can disrupt your normal hormone function, and may even be cancer causing.</p>
<p class="TXT">So there’s the trade-off that can be found at the heart of all Fatal <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page6" title="6"/>Conveniences: On the one hand—no more ironing! On the other—increased risk of cancer! Worth it?</p>
<p class="TXT">Here’s another. Early in the twentieth century, scientists discovered that areas with high levels of naturally occurring fluoride in their drinking water also had low levels of tooth decay. Before long, communities across the US were adding the chemical to their tap water, and soon after, manufacturers began putting it into toothpaste. A wonderful convenience.</p>
<p class="TXT">And then researchers learned some alarming facts about fluoride, mainly its toxic effects on the developing human brain.</p>
<p class="TXT">“Children in high-fluoride areas had significantly lower IQ scores than those who lived in low-fluoride areas,” according to one study. There were also some concerns about fluoride consumption and its relationship to bone cancer, bone fractures, and reproductive system problems.</p>
<p class="TXT">To be fair, fluoride is a problem only if you swallow it, but try telling that to kids happily using bubble gum−flavored toothpaste. So you decide—is a mouth of cavity-free teeth worth a couple of IQ points?</p>
<p class="TXT">Or maybe the kidney beans in that can are nutritious. But the lining of the can? Toxic. Or your new stretch jeans fit and look great. But they’re shedding tiny bits of microplastic that go into your body and your environment. Wouldn’t you rather get your beans and your jeans without anything gnarly on the side?</p>
<p class="TXT">That’s the kind of thing I’m going to be talking about. There’s a lot to say.</p>

<p class="TXF1"><span class="boldsc">I WANT TO WALK YOU</span> through a day in the life of Fatal Conveniences.</p>
<p class="TXT">Let’s begin with something really basic but really important: how you smell. How we <span class="ital">all</span> smell. Throughout this book, as you’ll see, the subject of fragrance comes up again and again. It’s one of the biggest culprits in the world of Fatal Conveniences, especially when we’re talking about personal care products, a very big deal in most of our lives.</p>
<p class="TXT">We’re all suckers for a pretty smell—the olfactory system is overwhelmingly powerful, the strongest of all our senses by far. You can smell something today and not again for the next couple decades, but when <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page7" title="7"/>you’re exposed to it then, you will recognize it. Can’t say the same about something you saw, heard, or felt.</p>
<p class="TXT">There’s a good reason our noses are so strong: we use our olfactory sense to tell us what is safe to eat. It’s why our noses are right over our mouths. In the wild, it’s also good for knowing if a predator (or prey) is nearby. Smell and survival go hand in hand.</p>
<p class="TXT">What’s so bad about smelling good? Fragrance holds a special place in the world of Fatal Conveniences due to a 1966 federal law that regulates labeling and packaging of personal care products. In that law there’s something known as “the fragrance loophole.” It means that manufacturers don’t have to list the ingredients used to give products their smell; instead they can just say “fragrance” or “parfum” on the label. That’s because the way something smells is considered a trade secret, meaning that we’re not allowed to know what we’re putting on our bodies. As a result, your lotion, soap, or shaving cream can have any combination of the more than three thousand chemicals used to give products their aroma, and you’ll never know what exactly is in a given product—or if it’s hazardous to your health.</p>
<p class="TXT">According to Janet Nudelman, co-founder of the Campaign for Safe Cosmetics, a project of the Breast Cancer Fund, “We found fragrance chemicals linked to cancer, birth defects, endocrine disruption and other serious health conditions in everything from children’s shampoo to body lotion to perfumes.” One chemical sometimes found in fragrance, styrene, has been labeled a human carcinogen, and others can cause allergic reactions and irritation of the skin, eyes, and lungs.</p>
<p class="TXT">With all that in mind, let’s start our day.</p>
<p class="TXT">We wake up and shower with soap or bodywash—there’s one fragrance. Shampoo, there’s another. Conditioner, another. Our deodorant is a fourth, our toothpaste and mouthwash, a fifth and sixth, and if we’re using skin lotion or moisturizer, we’re up to seven different smells. If you’re a woman who’s been deceived into thinking you need a vaginal deodorant, that’s number eight. Using some kind of hair product? Now we’re up to nine fragrances synthesized in industrial labs, and we still <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page8" title="8"/>haven’t put on the perfume or cologne that we intend for the world to inhale whenever we walk into a room. That’s number ten.</p>
<p class="TXT">Now let’s get dressed—meaning we’ll add in the aroma of our laundry detergent and maybe our dryer sheet or fabric softener, too. That’s eleven and twelve. Almost forgot—currently, something called an “in-wash scent booster” is popular, just in case our clothing needs to smell even better than we do.</p>
<p class="TXT">That’s more than a dozen different chemical smells. Which one is us? None of the above. What <span class="ital">do</span> we smell like? Who knows? Maybe we smell great without all that stuff, but as long as we keep using it, we’ll never know.</p>
<p class="TXT">I get it, we’d all like our hair to smell like a tropical rain forest, even though not many of us know what a tropical rain forest actually smells like. And who doesn’t want armpits that remind them of a field of wild lavender in the south of France? But come on! We’re exposing ourselves to who-knows-what dangers just so we can smell like something we’re not. Is that worth risking our health?</p>
<p class="TXT">Now we’re at home, another amazing convenience. It protects us from the harsh elements. It contains all the things we want and need to live (including all our other conveniences). It’s the place we gather, where we can hang out for hours on end, sleep, make love, or do anything else we want—it’s our castle. Once upon a time it was just a cave or a hut, but we’ve come a long way since then, and everything about our homes has only gotten better.</p>
<p class="TXT">No wonder we love being there! But of course—as I’ve already said—every convenience comes with a price tag, whether we see it or not.</p>
<p class="TXT">How is your house bad for your health? For one thing, our bodies and minds benefit from being outdoors in the open air, soaking up sunlight—in nature, because <span class="ital">we’re </span>nature. And when we’re outdoors, it’s likely that we’re moving around, and being in motion is another thing we need on a daily basis. Instead, we live more than 90 percent of our lives inside.</p>
<p class="TXT">Indoors, we spend too much time sitting in chairs, hunched over computers, earning a living, meaning we’re also courting back pain, neck pain, postural strain. When we had to hunt, gather, or grow our daily <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page9" title="9"/>sustenance, we spent most of our waking hours outside. Inside was where we went once the sun set, and since there was no electricity for lamps, TVs, or video games and we were exhausted anyway, we went to sleep. Our waking and sleeping were dictated by the planet’s rotation around the sun, our circadian sleep rhythms, and our biological clocks.</p>
<p class="TXT">Besides pushing against our more natural rhythms by spending so much of our time indoors, there is the added risk of our homes being filled with furnishings and carpeting that have been treated with various noxious chemicals. Our furniture’s upholstery and the lumber beneath it have probably been dosed with fire retardants and other chemicals. That sounded like a good idea when smoking was common and people had the unhealthy habit of dozing off on the sofa with a lit cigarette. We could have just resolved to be more careful, but instead we clamored for upholstery and even pajamas that had been treated with flame-retardant chemicals—without first checking to find out whether those chemicals caused health problems of their own.</p>
<p class="TXT">Your carpeting? It was possibly treated with formaldehyde, a carcinogen. The paint on your walls? That also contains chemicals that put your health at risk. The sheetrock? All the glues used in your floor, whether it’s tile or wood or something else? The same. Even those candles you love for how they fill your rooms with the aroma of the fake outdoors? That’s not all they fill your rooms with.</p>
<p class="TXT">The thing that happens is called <span class="ital">off-gassing</span>. The technical term is <span class="ital">volatile organic compounds</span>, or VOCs. It refers to the fumes that are constantly being given off by the objects we surround ourselves with. You can’t see them, but if you can smell them, they’re there. On any given day in our cozy homes, we might be gassed with formaldehyde, toluene, benzene, ammonia, and other nasty chemicals. You’re inhaling all that stuff. It’s entering through your nose, passing through your sinuses, and being sucked down into your lungs. That nice smell is created by those weird chemicals. They’re inside you now.</p>
<p class="TXT">We move from one controlled, artificial environment—our air-conditioned homes—into another—our air-conditioned cars and offices. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page10" title="10"/>When’s the last time you got good and sweaty? We’ve gotten to where we’re horrified by the thought—is that a perspiration mark on my shirt? Am I giving off a slightly human smell? That’s why antiperspirants were invented: to take the worry out of being close, as the commercials used to say.</p>
<p class="TXT">To be honest, I’m not worried about being close. If I’m a healthy human being wearing clean clothing, there’s nothing offensive about me. You, either. Nobody worried about being close until some clever adman thought it up, and he did so not out of concern for your social standing but so his boss could sell you a product containing aluminum salts, which stop the sweat from exiting your pores. Did he worry about the fact that those aluminum salts build up inside your body? And that aluminum has been linked to cancer and Alzheimer’s disease? Probably not.</p>
<p class="TXT">You want something to worry about? Try that.</p>
<p class="TXT">Once, kids in particular had a strong connection to their wild nature. They spent as much time as possible outdoors, under the sun, running and playing together, having fun. But look at how the Fatal Convenience of home has changed their lives over the past few decades. Today you’re more likely to find children and adolescents indoors, playing video games, burrowing into their apps, surfing the web, scrolling on their phones—exposing themselves to all kinds of radiation instead of the sun’s rays.</p>
<p class="TXT">Rather than sheltering in the comforts of our office or home all day long, we should take a break and go bask in sunlight to restore our vitamin D. It’s crucial to our health, and many of us are deficient in it. Sure, we could take a vitamin supplement instead—and just pray that it’s responsibly sourced and manufactured.</p>
<p class="TXT">But keep in mind that nutritional supplements are more or less unregulated, which is why that industry has been described as the Wild West. We can’t know for sure what’s in those pills, capsules, or powders, no matter what the label says. In some cases, studies have shown, the supplement contains absolutely none—not a single molecule—of whatever its label says it is. On the other hand, we know what’s in sunlight and all the benefits it has for us and every other living thing.</p>
<p class="TXT">Maybe you’ve been told that sunlight is hazardous to your skin and <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page11" title="11"/>too much exposure could lead to cancer. That’s true in some cases. But the usual remedy—slathering on sunscreen—may not be any safer. Sunscreen can contain toxic or even carcinogenic ingredients that will do more damage than the sun will. Here’s an idea: get some sunlight every day, but limit yourself to half an hour, either before or after the sun is at its highest point in the sky. There—problem solved without the “benefit” of a Fatal Convenience.</p>
<p class="TXT">Now let’s look at our food. Today, you can sit on your sofa, pick up your phone, order pretty much anything imaginable, and have it delivered to your door. You can expend zero calories in the effort to acquire meals fit for a king—several kings, in fact. That in itself is a disruption of the balance that exists everywhere in nature: every creature must expend energy in order to consume energy. Every creature except one.</p>
<p class="TXT">Once upon a time we had to go out and forage or kill our food. Today, you can sit on your sofa and summon it with your phone. What kind of food? I’ll take a guess that it’s not nearly as wholesome or nutritious as what you might have cooked for yourself. But it sure is convenient.</p>
<p class="TXT">Of course, we wouldn’t want to have to grow or raise or hunt everything we eat. Nobody wants to go back to preagricultural days or to a time when if we liked bread, cheese, or wine, we had to make our own. But—as often happens with us humans—we went from doing everything for ourselves to doing nothing. All the food-related conveniences, starting with the development of farming thousands of years ago, have made our lives easier and allowed us to survive without the threat of starvation. Can’t complain about that. But then we took our love of convenience too far.</p>
<p class="TXT">We have a way of doing that. It comes up over and over in this book.</p>
<p class="TXT">Drive down any highway in America, and you’ll come upon food that is sold on the promise of how quickly the restaurant can get it into your belly—fast food. Does it taste good? To a lot of people, yeah, obviously. Keep in mind, corporations hire armies of food scientists to develop items that will send our taste buds into a frenzy of excitement and flood our brains with dopamine. That’s their job.</p>
<p class="TXT">But is the food good for us? Can we even call it food? Let’s put it this <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page12" title="12"/>way—caring about that is <span class="ital">not</span> the food engineers’ job. The only people whose job it is to care about the quality of the food we eat are you and me.</p>
<p class="TXT">I don’t plan to be yet another person nagging you to stop eating things you love. But I do want you to pay attention to the Fatal Convenience that’s at the heart of all junk food and see what it’s doing to you.</p>
<p class="TXT">A study published in the <span class="ital">Journal of the American Medical Association</span> found that around two-thirds of the calories consumed by American kids today are in the form of ultraprocessed foods, meaning the cheap and easy things that children—who don’t know any better—love to eat; foods devoid of anything beneficial and full of nutritional nightmares.</p>
<p class="TXT">Of course, kids don’t have any money to go shopping, so they’re not to blame. We adults are—we and the systems we support that allow these atrocities. Childhood obesity is at an all-time high and still rising, and by the time the youths of today are adults, they’ll be dealing with that plus type 2 diabetes, which will bring with it a whole raft of debilitating diseases. That’s not such a great inheritance to leave to our kids.</p>
<p class="TXT">As if that weren’t bad enough, Food and Drug Administration (FDA) testing recently found that the most popular brands of baby food include dangerously high levels of inorganic arsenic in the rice, exceeding the legal limits. And that’s what we’re feeding our kids? Imagine the junk that’s in what the rest of us eat.</p>
<p class="TXT">But hey, that ultraprocessed food sure is ultraconvenient! You don’t have to cook it or do anything else with it to make it taste good, and there’s no cleaning up afterward. Sure, the food corporations work tirelessly to make those foods hyperpalatable—better tasting than anything found in nature, so good they’re addictive. But that’s only part of their appeal. If they weren’t so effortless to serve up, they wouldn’t be nearly as popular. Why work if you don’t have to?</p>
<p class="TXF1"><span class="boldsc">HERE’S A SCARY THOUGHT:</span> We don’t have to use a single Fatal Convenience for their harmful contents to make their way into our bodies. Their junk is in the air we breathe and the food and water we consume. Thousands <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page13" title="13"/>and thousands of industrial chemicals. Pesticides. Plastic residue. Metals. Hormone disruptors. The microparticles that every product sheds.</p>
<p class="TXT">I recently read that the average human being consumes 200,000 tiny pieces of plastic every year! I bet you didn’t know that, and how could you? Those little bits of petroleum-based nonbiodegradable garbage are invisible to the naked eye and tasteless, too. But they’re inside you now, doing who knows what damage. Research has shown that microplastic consumption is partly responsible for the frightening plunge in global sperm counts. Even the living creatures who will never use a single Fatal Convenience are suffering. In the middle of the Pacific Ocean, dead albatrosses have been found with entire plastic bottles inside their bodies.</p>
<p class="TXT">Remember that plastic water bottle you threw away two years ago? No? Well, that bottle remembers you—because by now it has entered into your environment in one form or another. It’s begun to break down and leave tiny traces of plastic somewhere, perhaps in the ocean, meaning that it’s inside the fish and will soon be inside you, too. That single-use bottle was such a great convenience. It meant you didn’t have to bother carrying a reusable flask around all day. No refilling required. No lugging.</p>
<p class="TXT">When you were done with that bottle, you threw it away and it was gone for good. But in fact there’s no such thing as throwing anything away. There’s no such thing as <span class="ital">away</span>. All our trash, especially the nonbiodegradable junk, all our exhaust and effluents, all our residues and runoffs, maybe we can no longer see them. But they’re there. They’re <span class="ital">here</span>. This may be the worst offender of all the Fatal Conveniences, because it’s the accumulation of every convenience we’ve ever enjoyed. We’re literally drowning in all our poor decisions.</p>
<p class="TXT">But hang on—how bad can any of those conveniences be when we have so many federal, state, and local agencies in place to protect us? The FDA, the CDC, the NIH, the EPA, the FTC, the USDA . . . the list of acronyms is endless. All are staffed with scientists, experts, and bureaucrats whose job it is to make sure we’re not exposed to anything dangerous in our food or other consumer products.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page14" title="14"/>However, as I just said, of the more than eighty thousand chemicals in commercial use today, most were untested before they reached us, and more than a thousand can cause cancer. But that doesn’t mean they’re automatically prohibited for human use. Every so often, scientific evidence of the danger of one of these substances will become impossible for governmental agencies to ignore. At that point, if we’re lucky, it will be banned from the products that we use. Of course, by then we’ve been exposed to it for years—decades, even.</p>
<p class="TXT">Here’s a perfect example of this madness: in 2022, the federal government banned the use of a common crop pesticide called chlorpyrifos because research showed that it is linked to reduced IQ, lower birth weight, and other developmental problems in children. In some cases, the exposure started when the victims were fetuses, even before they were born.</p>
<p class="TXT">But that’s not the scariest part. This chemical has been in widespread use since 1965, meaning that several generations of kids were exposed to it before the government decided to take action. And right up until it was banned, there were lobbyists who fought against taking it off the market! Keep that in mind when you wonder whether we’re really being legally fed poisons—even long after it’s known that they’re poisonous.</p>
<p class="TXT">That’s the only way government “protects” us. A manufacturer is not required to prove that a product or a chemical is safe before it goes into use. Only when the evidence of its danger is overwhelming and impossible to ignore will the government ban it. And even then, only maybe—and decades too late to do us much good. The mere fact that the government bans products that are already on the market tells us something frightful: nobody fully tests these substances <span class="ital">before</span> they reach us. It takes a lot of time, effort, and study before something that is proven to be bad for us actually goes away. Meanwhile, we’re eating it, applying it to our skin, or feeding it to our children—totally unaware of the harm it’s doing.</p>
<p class="TXT">Relying on governmental agencies and bureaucrats to protect us is itself a seductive, dangerous Fatal Convenience. It’s easy to believe that somebody else is looking out for us. It’s the most passive approach to health that I can think of—like waiting for a cavalry that always arrives <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page15" title="15"/>too late to save the day. This chemical is possibly cancer causing? Gee, thanks for letting us know—ten years after we started using products that contain it.</p>
<p class="TXT">We go through life behaving as though we’re being protected from harm, for the simple reason that to live otherwise—to accept the fact that we have to protect ourselves—is too scary to think about. The idea that we need to stop and worry about every single thing we put into or onto our bodies and then investigate all the various substances that go into them before we can use them . . . we’d all have to become full-time scientific investigators. We wouldn’t have time to do anything else.</p>
<p class="TXT">So we cross our fingers and hope that if it is on store shelves, it must be safe, and if anything was really and truly poisonous, we’d know about it. We’d see people falling ill all around us. Since that hasn’t happened, we believe that everything sold at the supermarket really is “food” and even the stuff we call junk food isn’t doing us irreparable harm. Or we assume that everything sold in a drugstore is beneficial to our health and does exactly what it says on the label and nothing more—nothing bad.</p>
<p class="TXT">Dream on.</p>
<p class="TXT">It’s crazy that we have to remind ourselves that many of those products exist because businesses have figured out our deepest insecurities, vanities, and fears and come up with ways to exploit them for profit. Their profits are more important than our health.</p>
<p class="TXT">We need to be sure that something is safe <span class="ital">before</span> we let it into our lives. We have to take a close look at our conveniences, question their purpose, and wonder what they might be doing to us.</p>
<p class="TXT">Really—interrogate everything!</p>
<p class="TXT">That sounds a little comical, I realize. But I’m honestly suggesting that tomorrow morning you look at your tube of toothpaste and, before you brush, read the list of ingredients. Then ask it, “What are you <span class="ital">really</span>? What are you putting inside my mouth? How much are you helping me? Are you truly the best I can do?”</p>
<p class="TXT">Then look down at your carpet and ask it, “What the heck is in <span class="ital">you</span>? Are you friend or foe?” When you get the answer, you might discover that <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page16" title="16"/>the nice, soft rug that feels so good under your bare feet has been exhaling formaldehyde into your face all along. Holy cow!</p>
<p class="TXT">Next, you can interrogate your sheets. Your microwave oven. Your laundry detergent. Your deodorant. Come right out and ask it, “Do I even <span class="ital">need</span> you? Do I <span class="ital">have</span> a bad odor? Because when I stop and think about it, <span class="ital">I don’t stink!”</span></p>
<p class="TXT">In many cases, I predict, you’ll examine something you’ve been using forever and realize that you don’t need it at all. That’s automatically an improvement! Plus, you’ll save money.</p>
<p class="TXT">It sounds like work, I know. We have become so accustomed to the conveniences in our lives that they’ve become like old friends—we can’t even remember how we met or why we hit it off. It’s as though they’ve been there forever.</p>
<p class="TXT">When I went away to college, I immediately started using the same laundry detergent my mom had always used. Who better than your mother to tell you how to clean your clothes? And they came out smelling the way they always had, which comforted a homesick college kid. If I hadn’t wised up along the way, I might still be using the same detergent my mother used back in the 1970s, even though it’s probably filled with the toxic chemicals I try so hard to avoid. In fact, there’s no guarantee that her brand of detergent is still made using the same formulation, even though the name is unchanged. Over the course of years, corporations find different (usually cheaper) ingredients to use. Do they announce the changes? Of course not. They want it to seem like the same wholesome product it’s always been.</p>
<p class="TXT">I can say the same about every kind of commercial big-brand product—foods, beverages, skin care products, clothing, soap, cologne, all of it. We’re buying a name, and beyond that—who knows <span class="ital">what</span> we’re buying?</p>
<p class="TXT">Once we begin really examining the conveniences in our lives, we’ll become more aware, involved participants in our own well-being. We’ll get back some of the sovereignty over our existence that we have given <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page17" title="17"/>away to companies and products that really, let’s face it, don’t care about our health as much as they care about their own profits.</p>
<p class="TXT">But even if we take the time to interrogate our conveniences, we’re not scientists—most of us, at least. How can we know what’s safe and what’s not? Here’s a good general rule: we are all living creatures, created by nature, so everything in our lives should be, too—or as much as possible. You don’t have to be a biologist to know that pure, organic coconut oil is closer to your biology—and more effective at moisturizing your skin—than a fancy skin lotion with a dozen ingredients, most of which you don’t recognize or can easily pronounce.</p>
<p class="TXT">A good first question to ask whenever we’re considering any product: Is it found in nature, more or less in this form? If the answer is yes, it’s probably safe. (Though even that isn’t always the case.) If the answer is no, proceed with caution.</p>
<p class="TXT">I know what you’re probably thinking: “How much bodily damage am I <span class="ital">really</span> doing with that little bit of formaldehyde I inhale every day? Who has actually gotten cancer from the Teflon in their no-iron shirts or had their hormones seriously disrupted by their mascara? Can’t we just not worry about <span class="ital">one thing</span>? I’m already anxious enough!”</p>
<p class="TXT">Honestly? You’re partly right; it’s not possible to accurately measure the damage done by daily exposure to <span class="ital">all</span> the harmful substances we come into contact with. You can’t easily tease out the impact on our bodies—there are too many variables. So it’s possible to rationalize our worries away by thinking that each tiny assault on our health probably isn’t such a big deal.</p>
<p class="TXT">But we don’t get them separately, in tiny bits. We get them all together, each one piled on top of the other. We absolutely do know for a fact that we’re exposing ourselves to multiple hazardous substances every day, all day.</p>
<p class="TXT">Here’s the question, then: At what point does a single straw break the poor camel’s back?</p>
<p class="TXT">Lately, scientists have come up with a new way to think about these <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page18" title="18"/>questions; they call it <span class="ital">cumulative body burden</span>, meaning the combined effects of all the substances we come into contact with during the course of daily living. It’s a way to show how our health is affected not just by one substance but by all of them together—the way we actually take them in. More important, it shows that once we absorb harmful chemicals, they don’t go anywhere in a hurry. They linger inside our bodies and mingle with our tissues.</p>
<p class="TXT">We got a lesson in total body burden from an unexpected source. Scientists used to believe that developing fetuses were protected from toxins and pollution by the mother’s placenta. But then, according to a 2005 report issued by the Environmental Working Group (EWG), an activist group dedicated to research and advocacy:</p>
<p class="EXTTF">Researchers at two major laboratories found an average of 200 industrial chemicals and pollutants in umbilical cord blood from 10 babies born in August and September of 2004 in U.S. hospitals. Tests revealed a total of 287 chemicals in the group. The umbilical cord blood of these 10 children, collected by Red Cross after the cord was cut, harbored pesticides, consumer product ingredients, and wastes from burning coal, gasoline, and garbage.</p>
<p class="EXTTM">This study represents the first reported cord blood tests for 261 of the targeted chemicals and the first reported detections in cord blood for 209 compounds. Among them are eight perfluorochemicals used as stain and oil repellents in fast food packaging, clothes and textiles—including the Teflon chemical PFOA, recently characterized as a likely human carcinogen by the EPA’s Science Advisory Board—dozens of widely used brominated flame retardants and their toxic by-products; and numerous pesticides.</p>
<p class="EXTTL">Of the 287 chemicals we detected in umbilical cord blood, we know that 180 cause cancer in humans or animals, 217 are toxic to the brain and nervous system, and 208 cause birth defects or abnormal development in animal tests. The dangers of pre- or post-natal <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page19" title="19"/>exposure to this complex mixture of carcinogens, developmental toxins and neurotoxins have never been studied.</p>
<p class="TXT">Pretty awful, right? Even before we’re born, we’re carrying a full load of harmful, even poisonous substances that exist in our mother’s surroundings and in the products she consumes.</p>
<p class="TXT">Then, in 2008, the EWG examined the total body burden carried around by teenage girls. That study found sixteen substances, some of which have been linked to cancer and hormone disruption, in blood and urine samples taken from girls ages fourteen to nineteen. They included DDT, the pesticide that was banned in 1972; lead, which was phased out of gasoline starting in 1975; and the Teflon chemical PFOA.</p>
<p class="TXT">Another important piece of the puzzle was revealed by the C8 Health Project. This was thanks to an environmental disaster, when the DuPont chemical company turned some West Virginia farmland into a toxic waste disposal site for poisons from a factory making chemicals used in Teflon and other industrial junk. Those waste products were found to be responsible for illnesses and deaths of people who lived nearby. They killed cattle and wildlife, too.</p>
<p class="TXT">A legal settlement required DuPont to set up a research project to study the total effects of the chemicals—which are called per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, or PFASs, but are also known as C8—on people living in the mid−Ohio Valley. The scientists released “probable link reports” indicating whether they did or did not find evidence that the chemical exposures caused various illnesses.</p>
<p class="TXT">Guess what they found? Probable links to six different disease categories: kidney cancer, testicular cancer, thyroid disease, ulcerative colitis, pregnancy-induced hypertension, and high cholesterol levels.</p>
<p class="TXT">Dr. Shanna H. Swan is one of the world’s leading environmental and reproductive epidemiologists. She’s a professor of environmental medicine and public health at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai in New York City. Dr. Swan studies how chemicals in our environment and <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page20" title="20"/>the products we use disrupt our reproductive systems, including the dramatic global drop in sperm count. She is the author of a landmark book titled <span class="ital">Count Down: How Our Modern World Is Threatening Sperm Counts, Altering Male and Female Reproductive Development, and Imperiling the Future of the Human Race</span>, published in 2021.</p>
<p class="TXT">I asked her about the effects of all the toxic substances accumulating in our bodies. “The question of cumulative body burden is complicated,” she said. “The chemicals that are nonpersistent (like the phthalates and bisphenols—think BPA) do not accumulate. They have short half-lives (four to six hours), but the exposure is ongoing. It comes into our bodies from the foods and products we are exposed to every day. On the other hand, the persistent EDCs (endocrine-disrupting chemicals, such as dioxins, PCBs, and so on) have long half-lives and do accumulate in body fat. In between those are the semipersistent ones, such as flame retardants and the PFAS chemicals, which have half-lives of many days.</p>
<p class="TXT">“Aside from accumulation,” she went on, “there is the issue of mixtures. We are exposed to over a hundred chemicals at once on an ongoing basis. And their joint effects are often greater than predicted by their individual risk, as is the case with medications, which is why your physician wants to know everything you are taking before she prescribes a new drug.</p>
<p class="TXT">“Finally, there is the cumulative effect across generations. Patricia A. Hunt [a professor in the School of Molecular Bioscience at Washington State University, best known for showing the effects of bisphenol A on the reproductive system] has shown that exposure to EDCs in consecutive generations magnifies the damage. It’s not as if each generation started with a clean slate; the parents’ and even grandparents’ exposure affects their offspring in a cumulative way.</p>
<p class="TXT">“Bottom line,” Dr. Swan concluded, “the unborn fetus is exposed in all these ways, and these exposures permanently affect his/her in utero development and future health and function. Then, after birth, exposure continues and acts on top of the in utero exposure.”</p>
<p class="TXT">Staggering! Let me sum it all up: Some harmful chemicals last in <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page21" title="21"/>our bodies for just a few hours. But we’re exposed to them constantly, so they never really go away. Other bad stuff hangs around much longer, in our body fat, continuously causing damage as long as it’s there. The big risk is that these toxins interact and become even more dangerous in combination—and so powerful that we can pass the harm along in our genes to future generations.</p>
<p class="TXT">That’s scary shit, I know.</p>
<p class="TXT">My goal in writing this book isn’t to frighten you away from the conveniences that make things easier, more practical, more pleasant. As I said before, I love conveniences as much as you do. I enjoy all the same ones as everybody else, trust me. The only difference is that I do my best to choose conveniences that won’t do me harm. They aren’t exposing me to chemicals that have proven to be carcinogenic, hormone disrupting, or bad for the environment—or to substances so new that we don’t really know what their effect will be on our health down the line. The conveniences I use aren’t constantly blasting me with electromagnetic radiation, cancer-causing pesticides, or endocrine system−altering lab concoctions.</p>
<p class="TXT">Yet my skin, hair, and clothes are as well tended as anybody else’s. I have a comfortable house full of the latest electronic equipment and gadgets, more than most people I know.</p>
<p class="TXT">But I refuse to buy products that will make me sick or—I’m serious!—possibly kill me. I’ve written this book so you can say the same. My goal here is not just to call out Fatal Conveniences; it’s to find solutions—better ways. Better Conveniences. Knowledge is power, and it’s time we take it back.</p>
</body>
</html>