<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Fatal Conveniences</title>
  <link href="../Styles/FatalConveniences.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1096cf69-c1c2-4b94-ac1d-5d952fe64055" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<p class="CN"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH010"><span class="blue"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page216" title="216"/>10</span></a></p>
<p class="CT"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CH010"><span class="blue">Okay, So <span class="boldital">Now</span> What Should We Do?</span></a></p>
<p class="TXFF"><span class="boldsc">WE’D ALL LOVE EVERYTHING WE BUY</span> and use to be natural, healthy, and green. But when those buzzwords become trendy, it’s a mixed blessing. On the one hand, it means we have more options and can find safe products even at little local shops and big chain stores. But it also creates the deceptive marketing practice known as “greenwashing,” coined by the environmentalist Jay Westerveld in 1986.</p>
<p class="TXT">He chided hotels for touting how environmentally sensitive they were for reusing towels, while simultaneously engaging in other practices that were far worse. Since then, the term has been widely used to expose brands that spend lots of effort on advertising and packaging their products as clean and natural—without investing in practices that make their merchandise less harmful to you and me.</p>
<p class="TXT">So as you go through life trying to find products that won’t make you sick and kill you, don’t get sucked in by the sales pitch. Here are some good brands you can try and reliable sources of useful information, along with the ultimate in Safe Conveniences: products you can make yourself.</p>






<p class="H1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page217" title="217"/>Personal Care Products</p>
<p class="Type">Deodorant</p>
<p class="DiyT">DIY Deodorant No. 1</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>2<span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> tablespoons unrefined coconut oil (suggested: Carrington Farms Organic Coconut Oil)</li>
<li>2<span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> tablespoons unrefined shea butter (suggested: Taha Natural Shea Butter)</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup arrowroot starch or flour (suggested: Bob’s Red Mill Arrowroot Starch)</li>
<li>1<span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> tablespoons baking soda</li>
<li>6 drops lavender essential oil (suggested: Aura Cacia 100% Pure Lavender Essential Oil)</li>
<li>6 drops grapefruit essential oil</li>
<li>1 drop tea tree essential oil</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Place the coconut oil and shea butter in a glass bowl or jar and place the bowl or jar inside a medium saucepan. Add enough water to the saucepan to surround the bowl or jar without overflowing into it and bring it to a boil.</p>
<p class="Step">Stir the coconut oil and shea butter continuously until they melt.</p>
<p class="Step">Once they are melted, remove pan from the heat and add the arrowroot starch, baking soda, and essential oils.</p>
<p class="Step">Pour into a 3-ounce glass jar, cover, and cool at room temperature or in the fridge until it reaches a solid state.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Healthy Maven (thehealthymaven.com)</span></p>
<p class="DiyT2">DIY Deodorant No. 2</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> teaspoon Himalayan salt or sea salt</li>
<li>6 drops lemon essential oil (suggested: Aura Cacia Lemon Essential Oil)</li>
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page218" title="218"/>1 drop geranium essential oil (suggested: Aura Cacia Geranium Essential Oil)</li>
<li>2 tablespoons rosewater</li>
<li>2 tablespoons grain alcohol, Everclear, or high-proof vodka (don’t use rubbing alcohol because you can become sensitized to it with regular use)</li>
<li>4 tablespoons pure witch hazel (suggested: WH Witch Hazel, 100% Natural Astringent)</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Combine the salt and essential oils in a small spray bottle and gently shake to combine.</p>
<p class="Step">Using a funnel, add the rosewater, alcohol, and witch hazel. Tighten the cap and shake.</p>
<p class="Step">Spray onto clean armpits and allow to dry briefly before dressing.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Kitchn (thekitchn.com)</span></p>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Vegan/Nontoxic Deodorants</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Native:</span> Durable protection, clean, and free of the nasties (nativecos.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Tom’s of Maine:</span> Twenty-four-hour wetness and odor protection made entirely of ingredients derived from plants and minerals (tomsofmaine.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Aubrey Organics:</span> Natural herbal extracts without harsh ingredients or preservatives (available at pureformulas.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Desert Essence:</span> Made with antibacterial botanical extracts and essential oils; aluminum free (desertessence.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Dr. Hauschka:</span> A roll-on with no aluminum salts (drhauschka.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">EcoRoots:</span> Clean, nontoxic, natural deodorant; aluminum free, paraben free, cruelty free, baking soda free, and vegan (www.ecoroots.us)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Ethique bars:</span> Vegan, palm oil free, cruelty free, aluminum free, and nontoxic (available at amazon.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page219" title="219"/>NaturisticBath:</span> Vegan and formulated without artificial or synthetic ingredients, aluminum, and baking soda (NaturisticBath at etsy.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Meow Meow Tweet:</span> A US-made zero-waste deodorant brand that is vegan and palm oil free (meowmeowtweet.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Hammond Herbs:</span> Free from aluminum, parabens, synthetic preservatives, synthetic fragrances, and animal testing (hammondherbs.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Refillable Deodorants</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Nuud:</span> Free from aluminum, artificial fragrances, and alcohol (nuudcare.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">By Humankind:</span> All initial purchases of deodorant and mouthwash come in refillable, recyclable containers with a lifetime guarantee. (byhumankind.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Lush:</span> Packaging-free options (www.lushusa.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Wild:</span> Product cases are customizable and made with anodized aluminum and recycled plastic. All refills are 100 percent plastic free. No parabens, artificial fragrances, or aluminum. The company also contributes a percentage of its sales to the reforestation charity On a Mission. (wearewild.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">For more information on cruelty-free deodorant, check out the PETA Certified List (crueltyfree.peta.org/product-type/?product=deodorant).</p>
<p class="H2">Toothpaste</p>
<p class="DiyT">DIY Toothpaste No. 1</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>8 tablespoons sodium bicarbonate (cleans with its abrasive properties and neutralizes stains and odors)</li>
<li>6 tablespoons glycerin (is both a lubricant and a binder)</li>
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page220" title="220"/>10–15 drops peppermint oil (adds the taste we all associate with a fresh mouth)</li>
<li>1 drop clove oil (is antimicrobial, antiviral, and antifungal)</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Mix all ingredients in a glass jar with a lid and use within two months.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Lindsay Miles (treadingmyownpath.com)</span></p>
<p class="DiyT2">DIY Toothpaste No. 2</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>2 tablespoons baking soda</li>
<li>2 tablespoons coconut oil</li>
<li>10 drops essential oil (use your favorite)</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Mix all ingredients in a glass jar with a lid and use within two months.</p>
<p class="SrcsH">Natural and Organic Toothpastes</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Lebon Organic Toothpaste:</span> Contains organic aloe vera and green tea to help prevent gum disease and tooth decay. With natural flavors such as pineapple, rooibos, mint, rose, and orange blossom. (lebonandlebon.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Bite Toothpaste Bits:</span> Clean, safe product in sustainable packaging (bitetoothpastebits.com; use discount code DARIN20)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Dr. Bronner’s All-One Toothpaste:</span> Vegan and mint flavored (drbronner.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Tom’s of Maine Cavity Protection Natural Toothpaste:</span> Not tested on animals and has no artificial flavors, colors, or preservatives (tomsofmaine.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Himalaya Neem and Pomegranate Toothpaste:</span> Cruelty free (himalayausa.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">ETEE Chewpaste:</span> Formulated with Canadian glacial clay, kaolin clay, and sodium laurel sulfoacetate, it contains no sulfates and is vegan and cruelty free. The product comes in a glass jar with a steel <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page221" title="221"/>lid. When empty, you can purchase more of the refillable toothpaste in compostable pouches. (shopetee.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Georganics Natural Mineral-Rich Toothpaste:</span> Eco friendly with no fluoride, SLS, palm oil, or glycerin. Contains calcium carbonate and sodium bicarbonate, which reduce tooth sensitivity. (georganics.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">The Dirt Trace Mineral Tooth Brushing Powder:</span> Vegan, paleo, and free from fluoride, glycerin, and GMO-derived xylitol (givemethedirt.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Scentcerae Tooth Nibs:</span> Little nuggets that you place inside your mouth, chew, and then brush normally. Contain bentonite clay, white kaolin clay, illite sea clay, sodium bicarbonate, natural soap nuts, and organic xylitol. (scentcerae.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">An Alternative to Traditional Oral Care</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Oil pulling:</span> This technique has been used for centuries. You just take a tablespoon or so of oil into your mouth—you can use olive oil, but I prefer coconut—and swish it around like mouthwash for 10 to 20 minutes before spitting it out. The oil picks up the bacteria, viruses, and other junk from your teeth, tongue, and gums, leaving your mouth clean and bad microbe free. Your dentist might never have heard of this, but there are plenty of scientific studies proving that it works.</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Foods That Help Keep Teeth Healthy</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Celery, carrots, and other crunchy veggies:</span> These foods, which contain lots of fiber, are natural cleaners because they stimulate saliva flow, which scrubs away food particles and bacteria while neutralizing citric and malic acids.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Leafy greens (spinach, kale, lettuce, and others):</span> These are rich in calcium, folic acids, minerals, and vitamins that are beneficial for teeth.</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page222" title="222"/>Apples and pears:</span> The fiber in these fruits increases saliva flow.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Nuts:</span> These are packed with calcium and phosphorus, which help fight decay.</li>
</ul>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> University of Illinois Chicago College of Dentistry (dentistry.uic.edu)</span></p>
<p class="H2">Sunscreen</p>
<p class="DiyT">DIY Sunscreen</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup coconut oil (has a natural SPF of 7)</li>
<li>25 drops walnut extract oil for scent and an added SPF boost</li>
<li>1 cup shea butter for consistency</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup pure aloe vera gel (recommended: Bioactif Pure Aloe Vera Gel)</li>
<li>2 tablespoons powdered zinc oxide (or more if you like)</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">In a medium saucepan over medium heat, combine all ingredients except the aloe vera gel and the zinc oxide. Stir and let everything melt together.</p>
<p class="Step">Let cool for several minutes before stirring in the aloe vera gel.</p>
<p class="Step">Cool completely before adding the zinc oxide. Mix well to make sure the zinc oxide is distributed throughout.</p>
<p class="Step">Store in a glass jar, and keep in a cool, dry place until ready to use.</p>
<p class="Step">Two caveats:</p>
<ul class="bullet-in">
<li>This solution is not waterproof, so it must be reapplied frequently if used in a pool or at the beach.</li>
<li>For oily skin, swap jojoba or sweet almond oil for the coconut oil.</li>
</ul>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Kathryn Watson (healthline.com)</span></p>
<p class="SrcsH2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page223" title="223"/>Safe Sunscreens</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Banana Boat Sport Mineral Lotion SPF 50+:</span> This sunscreen provides a high endurance-versus-sweat ratio and 100 percent mineral composition. It’s great for sensitive skin and free from potentially harmful chemicals such as oxybenzone, parabens, and phthalates. It has the National Eczema Association seal of acceptance. (bananaboat.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Banana Boat Sensitive 100% Mineral Lotion SPF 50+:</span> Formulated with naturally sourced zinc, it’s hypoallergenic and has a National Eczema Association seal of acceptance. Zinc oxide and titanium dioxide are the only active ingredients, with no added oils or fragrances. Also recommended by the Skin Cancer Foundation. (bananaboat.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Babo Botanicals Baby Skin Mineral Sunscreen:</span> This might be more expensive than the other options mentioned, but its formula is hypoallergenic and rated number one in safety by the Environment Working Group (EWG). Made from 100 percent mineral zinc for broad spectrum UVA and UVB protection. (babobotanicals.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Sun Bum Moisturizing Sunscreen Lotion:</span> Protects against UVA and UVB rays and is water resistant for up to eighty minutes. Tested and approved by the Skin Cancer Foundation; suitable for all skin types; paraben free, oil free, hypoallergenic, gluten free, noncomedogenic, reef friendly, dermatologist approved, octinoxate free, and oxybenzone free. (sunbum.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Suntegrity Sunscreen:</span> Non−nano zinc oxide and titanium dioxide. Other ingredients include grapeseed oil, karanja oil, squalane, argan oil, olive oil, papaya and mango fruit extracts, and rice bran extract. Nonaerosol and TSA-friendly size. (suntegrityskincare.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Babo Botanicals Daily Sheer Fluid SPF 50 Tinted Sunscreen:</span> Non−nano zinc oxide mineral sunscreen combined with sweet white lupine for broad-spectrum SPF 50 protection against UVA, UVB, and blue light. Fragrance free and suitable for all skin types, although <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page224" title="224"/>it is especially good for sensitive skin. Rich in vitamins and antioxidants. (babobotanicals.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Babo Botanicals Sheer Mineral Sunscreen SPF 50:</span> Formulated for all sensitive skin types; provides eighty minutes of water and sweat resistance (babobotanicals.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Lumiton:</span> A clothing brand whose garments convert harmful UV rays into red and near-infrared light, bathing you in healthy frequencies (lumiton.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Tips from the Skin Cancer Foundation</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Limit your sun exposure between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., even in winter.</li>
<li>Remember that trees, umbrellas, and hats provide imperfect protection.</li>
<li>Snow, water, and sand are powerful reflectors of the sun’s rays, so be extra careful in their presence.</li>
<li>Clothing provides some protection depending on a number of factors. Intense colors absorb UV rays better than light-colored garments do. If you can see light through the fabric, it won’t be much protection from the sun. Keep the following factors in mind when shopping.
<ul class="bullet-2">
<li><span class="bold">Color:</span> Dark or bright colors keep UV rays from reaching your skin by absorbing them.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Construction:</span> Densely woven cloth, such as denim, canvas, wool, or synthetic fiber, is more protective than sheer, thin, or loosely woven cloth.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Tip:</span> Check a fabric’s sun safety by holding it up to the light. If you can see through it, UV radiation can easily penetrate the fabric and reach your skin.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Content:</span> Unbleached cotton contains natural lignans that act as UV absorbers. Shiny polyesters and even lightweight satiny silks can be highly protective because they reflect radiation. High-tech fabrics treated with chemical UV absorbers.</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page225" title="225"/>Fit:</span> Loose-fitting apparel is preferable. Tight clothing can stretch and reduce the level of protection offered.</li>
<li><span class="bold">UPF:</span> Some clothing makers provide ultraviolet protection factor (UPF) labels that indicate exactly how much of the sun’s rays the garment can shield.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Coverage:</span> The more skin your outfit covers, the better. Whenever possible, wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants or skirts.</li>
</ul>
</li>
</ul>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> The Skin Cancer Foundation (skincancer.org)</span></p>
<p class="Type">Moisturizer</p>
<p class="DiyT">DIY Moisturizer No. 1</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>2<span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> ounces avocado, apricot, jojoba, almond, or other oil</li>
<li>2<span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> ounces shea, coconut, mango, or cocoa butter</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> ounce beeswax (hard shavings are best)</li>
<li>3<span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> ounces distilled water</li>
<li>25 drops grapefruit seed extract</li>
<li>20 drops essential oil of your choice</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Mix all ingredients in a glass jar with a lid.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Bellatory (bellatory.com)</span></p>
<p class="DiyT2">DIY Moisturizer No. 2</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li><span class="fraction_numerator">3</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup aloe vera gel</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup distilled or purified water</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> cup beeswax, grated or pellets</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> cup jojoba or sweet almond oil</li>
<li>1 teaspoon vitamin E oil</li>
<li>15 drops lavender essential oil (optional)</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Mix all ingredients in a glass jar with a lid.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Treehugger (treehugger.com)</span></p>
<p class="SrcsH2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page226" title="226"/>Sources of Nontoxic Moisturizers</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Caldera + Lab</span> (calderalab.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Kora Organics</span> (us.koraorganics.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Mad Hippie</span> (madhippie.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Amazon Aware</span> (amazon.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Avalon Organics</span> (avalonorganics.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">True Botanicals</span> (truebotanicals.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Inna Organic</span> (innaorganic.co)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Mineral Fusion</span> (mineralfusion.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">The Earthling Co.</span> (theearthlingco.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Cocokind</span> (cocokind.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Primally Pure</span> (primallypure.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">100% Pure</span> (100percentpure.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Dr. Bronner’s </span>(drbronner.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Biossance</span> (biossance.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">OSEA</span> (oseamalibu.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Prima</span> (prima.co)</li>
<li><span class="bold">The Honest Company</span> (honest.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="ARH">Additional Resources</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">EWG’s Skin Deep:</span> Has excellent information to help you choose safe and green products (ewg.org/skindeep/)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Think Dirty:</span> Another good source of information (thinkdirtyapp.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Yuka:</span> Yet another good source of information (yuka.io)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Soap and Bodywash</p>
<p class="DiyT">DIY Bodywash No. 1</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li><span class="fraction_numerator">2</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">3</span> cup liquid Castile soap</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup raw honey</li>
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page227" title="227"/>2 teaspoons jojoba oil (you can also use sweet almond, grapeseed, sesame, or olive oil)</li>
<li>1 teaspoon vitamin E oil</li>
<li>50–60 drops essential oil of your choice</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Mix all ingredients in a glass bottle.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> DIY Natural (diynatural.com)</span></p>
<p class="DiyT2">DIY Bodywash No. 2</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> cup shea butter</li>
<li>1 tablespoon apricot oil</li>
<li>1 tablespoon aloe vera gel</li>
<li>2 tablespoons vegetable glycerin</li>
<li>3 drops spearmint essential oil</li>
<li>6 drops bergamot essential oil</li>
<li>3 drops vetiver essential oil</li>
<li>1 cup liquid Castile soap</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Mix all ingredients in a 16-ounce pump dispenser bottle.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> DIY Natural (diynatural.com)</span></p>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Safe Soap and Bodywash</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Caldera + Lab</span> (calderalab.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Kora Organics</span> (us.koraorganics.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Mad Hippie</span> (madhippie.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Amazon Aware</span> (amazon.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Avalon Organics</span> (avalonorganics.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">True Botanicals</span> (truebotanicals.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Inna Organic</span> (innaorganic.co)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Mineral Fusion</span> (mineralfusion.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">The Earthling Co.</span> (theearthlingco.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Cocokind</span> (cocokind.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page228" title="228"/>Primally Pure</span> (primallypure.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">100% Pure</span> (100percentpure.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Dr. Bronner’s </span>(drbronner.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Biossance</span> (biossance.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">OSEA</span> (oseamalibu.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Prima</span> (prima.co)</li>
<li><span class="bold">The Honest Company</span> (honest.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Fragrances</p>
<p class="TXF1">Each of these perfumes requires a glass roller, a carrier oil (such as jojoba, sweet almond, or grapeseed oil), and 100 percent essential oil for scent. All recipes are from Hello Glow (helloglow.co).</p>
<p class="DiyT">DIY Floral Perfume</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>1 ounce carrier oil</li>
<li>5 drops sweet orange essential oil</li>
<li>2 drops organic lime essential oil</li>
<li>2 drops jasmine absolute in jojoba oil</li>
<li>2 drops vanilla in jojoba oil</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Mix all ingredients in a glass jar or bottle with a lid.</p>
<p class="DiyT">DIY Rose Perfume</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>1 ounce carrier oil</li>
<li>2 drops rose absolute essential oil</li>
<li>4 drops sandalwood in jojoba oil</li>
<li>5 drops bergamot essential oil</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Mix all ingredients in a glass jar or bottle with a lid.</p>
<p class="DiyT">DIY Citrus Perfume</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>1 ounce carrier oil</li>
<li>2 drops lemon essential oil</li>
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page229" title="229"/>3 drops lime essential oil</li>
<li>5 drops vanilla in jojoba oil</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">Mix all ingredients in a glass jar or bottle with a lid.</p>
<p class="SrcsH2">How to Choose an Essential Oil</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Woody scent:</span> Cedarwood, pine, or labdanum</li>
<li><span class="bold">Musky scent:</span> Botanical musk or ambrette</li>
<li><span class="bold">Citrus scent:</span> Bergamot, lemon, or grapefruit</li>
<li><span class="bold">Herbal scent:</span> Lavender, chamomile, or rosemary</li>
<li><span class="bold">Floral scent:</span> Rose, geranium, iris, jasmine, magnolia, peony, or ylang-ylang</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Safe Fragrances</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Tsila Organics:</span> Perfume oils (tsilaorganics.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Eden’s Garden:</span> Essential oil perfumes (edensgarden.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">1912 Aromatherapy:</span> Aromatherapy products (1912aromatherapy.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Doterra:</span> Essential oils (doterra.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">Perfume oils are a good alternative to liquid and spray perfumes; they’re often made of cleaner ingredients and also last longer.</p>
<p class="H2">Cosmetics</p>
<p class="DiyT">DIY Lipstick</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>1 teaspoon beeswax pellets</li>
<li>1 teaspoon shea, cocoa, or mango butter</li>
<li>1–2 teaspoons sweet almond or coconut oil</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">8</span> teaspoon beetroot powder</li>
</ul>

<p class="Step">Place the beeswax, butter, and oil in the top of a double boiler, glass liquid measuring cup, or heatproof bowl. Put the bowl or <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page230" title="230"/>measuring cup in a saucepan filled halfway with water. Bring the water to a simmer. Let it simmer until the mixture is melted.</p>
<p class="Step">Remove from heat and mix in any additional ingredients for color or scent.</p>
<p class="Step">Use a dropper to quickly transfer the liquid into a small jar. Allow a bit of room at the top since the mixture will expand slightly as it cools.</p>
<p class="Step">Cool for at least 30 minutes or until completely hardened before putting on the lid.</p>
<p class="Step">Store in a dry, cool place. Use within 6 months.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Healthline (healthline.com)</span></p>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Safe Cosmetics</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">ZeroWasteStore:</span> Discloses all ingredients and offers refillable makeup products (zerowastestore.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Neek Skin Organics:</span> A vegan, cruelty-free makeup brand that uses sustainable packaging and is free from synthetic dyes, parabens, phthalates, sulfates, mineral oil, palm oil, perfume, and lead (neekskinorganics.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">The Clean Beauty Box:</span> May be best known for its monthly prescription boxes, but to reduce waste, consider buying only its individual products (cleanbeautybox.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">RMS Beauty:</span> One of the oldest clean beauty brands (rmsbeauty.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="ARH">Additional Resources</p>
<p class="TXF1"><span class="bold">Good Face Project:</span> Analyzes and rates cosmetic ingredients (thegoodfaceproject.com)</p>
<p class="H2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page231" title="231"/>Shampoo and Conditioner</p>
<p class="DiyT">DIY Shampoo Bar</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>1 cup melt-and-pour Castile soap base</li>
<li>1 teaspoon olive oil</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> teaspoon castor oil</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> teaspoon black molasses</li>
<li>15 drops vanilla essential oil</li>
<li>15 drops patchouli essential oil</li>
<li>10 drops rosemary essential oil</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Cut the melt-and-pour soap base into small cubes. Add to a double boiler or an aluminum bowl in a pan half filled with warm water over low to medium heat. The water should be simmering, not boiling. Stir continuously until the soap base is melted.</p>
<p class="Step">Add the olive oil, castor oil, and black molasses and mix well.</p>
<p class="Step">Take the bowl off the heat and wait a few minutes until slightly cooled.</p>
<p class="Step">Add the essential oils and mix well.</p>
<p class="Step">Pour into a soap mold and let harden for 24 hours. No need to store.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Healthline (healthline.com)</span></p>
<p class="SrcsH2">Online Sources of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page232" title="232"/>Safe Shampoo and Conditioner</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Dr. Bronner’s </span>(also available in stores) (drbronner.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">True Botanicals</span> (truebotanicals.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Ceremonia</span> (ceremonia.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">100% Pure</span> (100percentpure.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Ursa Major</span> (ursamajorvt.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Zero Waste</span> (zerowastestore.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Puracy</span> (puracy.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Safe Shampoo and Conditioner Brands Sold in Stores</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Herbal Essences Bio:Renew Sulfate-Free Shampoo</span></li>
<li><span class="bold">Pipette Nourishing Shampoo</span></li>
</ul>
<p class="ARH">Additional Resources</p>
<p class="H3-TXFF">As I said earlier, the entire personal care category is a minefield of hazardous products. Fortunately, the Environmental Working Group has a program to verify safe, environmentally sane products that meet its strict, scientific standards for transparency and health. That means that the products don’t contain any ingredients causing health, ecotoxicity, or contamination concerns and the manufacturers are transparent about all the ingredients on their labels, including fragrance, and follow good manufacturing practices. The EWG has also created a database of personal care products on which you can check their ingredients against a list of regulatory databases and see whether their manufacturers test on animals. These evaluations can be found at ewg.org/skindeep. You can look for the EWG Verified label on products sold in stores, too.</p>
<p class="TXT">The nonprofit Nontoxic Certified created the MADE SAFE seal to verify the personal care products that don’t contain any of the 6,500 substances on its banned list. It also looks for products that will not harm our water, air, and soil. You can find info at madesafe.org or look for the MADE SAFE seal on product labels.</p>
<p class="H1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page233" title="233"/>Foods and Beverages</p>
<p class="Type">Fast Foods</p>
<p class="SrcsH">Plant-Based/Organic “Fast-Food” (but Not the Evil Kind) Restaurant Chains</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Grabbagreen</span> (grabbagreen.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Sweetgreen</span> (sweetgreen.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Freshii</span> (freshii.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Veggie Grill</span> (veggiegrill.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Dairy Products</p>
<p class="TXF1">When making DIY nut milk, a nut milk machine such as Nutr (thenutr.com) or Almond Cow (almondcow.co) simplifies the process.</p>
<p class="DiyT2">DIY Pistachio Milk</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>1 cup dry pistachio nuts</li>
<li>4 cups filtered water</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Soak the nuts for six hours or overnight. You can then peel them for a brighter green pistachio milk, but this isn’t necessary.</p>
<p class="Step">Place the soaked nuts into a high-speed food processor or blender and blend on high. You want to break them down into small pieces without turning them into pistachio butter.</p>
<p class="Step">When the nuts are ready, add the water and blend again for about 1–2 minutes.</p>
<p class="Step">Pour into a large glass bottle (you can use a nut milk bag if you have one) and store in the fridge up to 3 to 5 days. Shake well before drinking.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Alpha Foodie (alphafoodie.com)</span></p>
<p class="DiyT2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page234" title="234"/>DIY Oat Milk</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> cup whole rolled oats (organic)</li>
<li>3 cups water</li>
<li>2 teaspoons maple syrup (or stevia or monkfruit sweetener)</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> teaspoon vanilla extract</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">8</span> teaspoon sea salt</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Combine the oats, water, maple syrup, vanilla, and salt in a blender and blend for 30 seconds.</p>
<p class="Step">Place a fine mesh strainer over a large bowl and strain the milk without pushing any excess pulp through the strainer. This will create a creamy texture that’s not gritty or gummy.</p>
<p class="Step">Add more maple syrup to taste, if desired. Chill overnight. If you want to drink the oat milk right away, I recommend adding ice, as it tastes best when chilled.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Love and Lemons (loveandlemons.com)</span></p>
<p class="DiyT2">DIY Vegan Cheese Sauce</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li><span class="fraction_numerator">3</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup peeled and diced Yukon Gold potato</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">3</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup peeled and diced sweet potato</li>
<li>2 garlic cloves</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup raw cashews</li>
<li>1 tablespoon apple cider vinegar</li>
<li>2 tablespoons nutritional yeast</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> teaspoon onion powder</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> teaspoon sea salt</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup extra-virgin olive oil</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup water</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">To make the cheese spicy or smoky, add:</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span>−1 chipotle pepper from canned chipotles in adobo</li>
<li>1 tablespoon pickled jalapeños</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span>−<span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> teaspoon smoked paprika</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page235" title="235"/>Place the potatoes in a saucepan and cover with cold water by about 1 inch. Add a few pinches of salt. Bring to a boil, then reduce the heat and simmer, uncovered, until fork tender, 8 to 12 minutes.</p>
<p class="Step">Drain and transfer to a high-speed blender. Add the garlic, cashews, vinegar, nutritional yeast, onion powder, salt, olive oil, and <span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup water. Blend until smooth.</p>
<p class="Step">For spicy vegan cheese, add the chipotle pepper or pickled jalapeños. For a smoky flavor, add the smoked paprika.</p>
<p class="Step">Serve with tortilla chips for dipping or over pasta to make vegan mac and cheese.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Love and Lemons (loveandlemons.com)</span></p>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Alt Milk−Making Equipment</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Milkmade Non-dairy Milk Maker</span> by Chefe ($249.95) (mychefwave.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Nutr Machine</span> ($169.00) (thenutr.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">The Big Cheese Making Kit:</span> Makes 20 batches of cheese for $26.73. The kit makes six types: mozzarella, ricotta, mascarpone, halloumi, feta, and parmesan. (bigcheesemakingkit.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Water and Other Beverages</p>
<p class="SrcsH">Sources of Reverse Osmosis or Distillation Filters</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">AquaTru</span> (aquatru.com; go to darinolien.com for a $100 discount)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Vevor</span> (vevor.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">H2oLabs</span> (h2olabs.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Trace Minerals and Pink Himalayan Salt to Add to Distilled Water</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">The Spice Lab</span> (for pink Himalayan salt) (spices.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">The Original Salt Company</span> (theoriginalsaltcompany.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page236" title="236"/>SaltWorks</span> (seasalt.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Trace Mineral Drops</span> (concentrated complex of full-spectrum, naturally occurring ionic trace minerals from Utah’s inland sea) (available at iherb.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Quinton</span> (ocean minerals) (quicksilverscientific.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Healthy Canned and Bottled Beverages, Including Water</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Poppi</span> (drinkpoppi.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Recess:</span> Sparkling water infused with hemp and adaptogens (takearecess.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Olipop:</span> Gut-friendly soda (drinkolipop.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">PathWater:</span> Bottled in aluminum (not ideal but better than plastic); the company gives back to environmental/social justice causes (drinkpathwater.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">FreeWater:</span> An innovative advertising platform that utilizes spring water as a new medium while prioritizing philanthropy and sustainability (freewater.io)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Mananalu:</span> Jason Momoa’s aluminum bottled water company (mananalu.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Glass and Heavy Metal−Free Bottles</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Flaska:</span> Provides structured water from embedded frequencies in its glass bottles (flaska.us)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Blue Bottle Love:</span> Frequency bottles; use promo code DARIN (bluebottlelove.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">The One Movement:</span> Sustainable bottles that combat plastic pollution in the ocean (theonemovement.co)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Hydro Flask:</span> Certified lead-free bottles (hydroflask.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Klean Kanteen:</span> Certified heavy metal−free bottles (kleankanteen.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="ARH"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page237" title="237"/>Additional Resources</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Find a Spring:</span> Lists local spring water sources (findaspring.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Meat and Poultry</p>
<p class="DiyT">Black Bean Burger</p>
<p class="TXF1">Before you decide you need meat, try this DIY black bean burger.</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>1 flax “egg” (1 tablespoon flaxseed meal + 3 tablespoons water, beaten together)</li>
<li>1 teaspoon olive oil</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> red onion, finely diced</li>
<li>2–3 cloves garlic, minced</li>
<li>1 large carrot, shredded</li>
<li>1 (15 ounce) can black beans, rinsed and drained</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span>–<span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">3</span> cup oat flour, gluten free if desired</li>
<li>1 teaspoon cumin</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> teaspoon garlic powder</li>
<li>1 teaspoon chili powder</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> teaspoon paprika</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> teaspoon salt</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Mix everything, form into patties, cook right away or store in the freezer.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> CU Anschutz Health and Wellness Center (anschutzwellness.com)</span></p>
<p class="TXT">Eating a variety of plant-based protein, including grains, legumes, nuts, and seeds, can provide adequate amino acids and protein, just as animal flesh does. Here are some examples:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Tempeh: 16 grams of protein per cup</li>
<li>Edamame: 12 grams of protein per cup</li>
<li>Tofu: 11 grams of protein per cup</li>
<li>Soy milk: 4 grams of protein per cup</li>
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page238" title="238"/>Almond milk: 24 grams of protein per cup</li>
<li>Hemp milk: 12 grams of protein per cup</li>
<li>Barukas nuts: 6 grams of protein per cup</li>
<li>Pistachio nuts: 6 grams of protein per cup</li>
<li>Pumpkin seeds: 10 grams of protein per cup</li>
<li>Quinoa: 4 grams of protein per cup</li>
<li>Chickpea pasta: 13 grams of protein per cup</li>
<li>Oats: 4 grams of protein per cup</li>
<li>Brown rice: 3 grams of protein per cup</li>
<li>Couscous: 3 grams of protein per cup</li>
<li>Lentils: 9 grams of protein per 100 grams uncooked</li>
<li>White beans: 9.7 grams of protein per 100 grams uncooked</li>
<li>Split peas: 8.3 grams of protein per 100 grams uncooked</li>
<li>Pinto beans: 9 grams of protein per 100 grams uncooked</li>
<li>Kidney beans: 8.7 grams of protein per 100 grams uncooked</li>
<li>Black beans: 8.9 grams of protein per 100 grams uncooked</li>
<li>Navy beans: 8.2 grams of protein per 100 grams uncooked</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">You can always supplement your diet with a vegan protein powder of your choice!</p>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Clean, Plant-Based Foods</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Upton’s Naturals</span> (uptonsnaturals.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Big Mountain Foods</span> (bigmountainfoods.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Better Nature</span> (betternaturetempeh.co)</li>
<li><span class="bold">The Jackfruit Company</span> (thejackfruitcompany.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Actual Veggies</span> (actualveggies.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">If You Must Eat Meat, Try These Ethical, Sustainable, Organic Brands</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Wild Pastures:</span> Grass fed, pasture raised; regenerative farming (wildpastures.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page239" title="239"/>Seven Sons:</span> Regenerative; pasture raised (sevensons.net)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Cooks Venture:</span> Regenerative, organic, humane farming (cooksventure.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">U.S. Wellness Meats:</span> Sustainable land management; grass fed (grasslandbeef.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="ARH">Additional Resources</p>
<p class="TXT1">Consult “Decoding Meat and Dairy Product Labels,” on the EWG website, to research standards for meat and poultry. (ewg.org)</p>
<p class="H2">Fish Substitutes</p>
<p class="DiyT">DIY Vegan Tuna</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>1<span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> cups cooked chickpeas, or a 15.5-ounce can of chickpeas, drained (from non-BPA cans)</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup vegan mayonnaise</li>
<li>1 nori sheet, finely chopped</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup finely chopped red onion</li>
<li>1 tablespoon lemon juice</li>
<li>10 capers, finely chopped</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> teaspoon garlic powder</li>
<li>1 tablespoon nutritional yeast</li>
<li>1 tablespoon tamari or non-GMO soy sauce</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> tablespoon Dijon mustard</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> teaspoon white vinegar</li>
<li>Salt and pepper to taste</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Place the chickpeas in a mixing bowl. Mash them with a fork. Mix with the other ingredients.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Loving It Vegan (lovingitvegan.com)</span></p>
<p class="TXT">Legumes are a great, protein-rich vegan fish substitute—try soybeans, black beans, chickpeas, white beans, yellow peas, green peas, black-eyed peas, and others.</p>
<p class="SrcsH2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page240" title="240"/>Alternative Sources of Protein and Omega-3 Fatty Acids</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Brussels sprouts:</span> Each 1.5-ounce serving of cooked Brussels sprouts contains 44 milligrams of alpha-linoleic acid (ALA), 4 percent of the daily recommended intake.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Algal oil:</span> Depending on the supplement, provides 400–500 milligrams of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), fulfilling 44–167 percent of the daily recommended intake. Recommended sources:
<ul class="bullet-2">
<li><span class="bold">Performance Lab:</span> Vegan, non-GMO, GMP certified, mercury free, and free from banned substances (performancelab.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Vegetology:</span> Vegan, 100 percent lab grown (vegetology.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Algamega:</span> Vegan, non-GMO, closed-system cultivation; contains both DHA and EPA (algamega.net)</li>
</ul></li>
<li><span class="bold">Chia seeds:</span> Best bought as whole seeds; grind with a coffee grinder or dry blender as needed.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Flaxseeds:</span> Best bought as whole seeds; grind with a coffee grinder or dry blender as needed. Recommended products:
<ul class="bullet-2">
<li><span class="bold">Bob’s Red Mill Flaxseed </span>(bobsredmill.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Spectrum Essentials Organic Ground Premium Flaxseed</span> (spectrumorganics.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Terrasoul Brown Flax Seeds</span> (terrasoul.com)</li>
</ul></li>
<li><span class="bold">Walnuts:</span> 1 ounce contains 2,570 milligrams of ALA omega-3 fatty acids, 160–233 percent of the daily recommended intake.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Spirulina:</span> Contains omega-3 fatty acids in the form of ALA, EPA, and DHA. Recommended product:
<ul class="bullet-2">
<li><span class="bold">Raw Living Spirulina</span> (rawlivingspirulina.com)</li>
</ul></li>
<li><span class="bold">Tofu and tempeh:</span> Derived from soybeans, they contain 8 grams of protein per 100 grams.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Quinoa:</span> 100 grams of quinoa contain 4 grams of protein. Quinoa contains all twenty-two amino acids.</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page241" title="241"/>Excellent options exist for those who crave seafood flavor without the harm involved. These are processed foods, of course, but they’re okay to eat every once in a while.</p>
<p class="SrcsH">Recommended Brands</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Good Catch</span> (goodcatchfoods.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Gardein</span> (gardein.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">BeLeaf</span> (beleafvegan.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Sophie’s Kitchen</span> (sophieskitchen.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">The Plant-Based Food Seafood Co.</span> (plantbasedseafoodco.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Produce</p>
<p class="TXF1">DIY: grow your own, if you can. <span class="bold">Love the Garden</span> (lovethegarden.com) has great info on how to do it in easy, practical ways. If you have some land to work with, you can look into permaculture and/or regenerative agriculture at <span class="bold">Food Forest Abundance</span> (foodforestabundance.com).</p>
<p class="TXT">The Environmental Working Group publishes a list of nonorganic produce you can safely buy, which it calls “The Clean 15”:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Sweet corn (always choose non-GMO)</li>
<li>Onions</li>
<li>Cabbage</li>
<li>Asparagus</li>
<li>Avocados</li>
<li>Pineapples</li>
<li>Mangoes</li>
<li>Honeydew melon</li>
<li>Sweet peas</li>
<li>Papaya</li>
<li>Kiwi</li>
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page242" title="242"/>Mushrooms</li>
<li>Cantaloupe</li>
<li>Sweet potatoes</li>
<li>Watermelon</li>
</ul>
<p class="ARH">Organic Produce</p>
<p class="TXF1">Organic food is 20 to 40 percent higher in antioxidants than nonorganic, and it doesn’t have added antibiotics, hormones, or synthetic additives that can result in serious health complications.</p>
<p class="SrcsH2">Where to Find More Information</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">USDA Organic Food Finder </span>(https://organic.ams.usda.gov/integrity) (USDA Organic Integrity Database)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Tips for Buying and Eating Organic Food on a Budget</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Grow sprouts. To find out how, read <span class="ital">The Sprout Book: Tap into the Power of the Planet’s Most Nutritious Food</span> by Doug Evans.</li>
<li>Shop at your local farmers’ market.</li>
<li>Buy food in bulk.</li>
<li>Cook instead of ordering in or eating out.</li>
<li>Buy seasonal.</li>
<li>Buy frozen food instead of fresh (it’s cheaper and may be more nutritious).</li>
<li>Keep in mind that proper storage extends foods’ shelf life.</li>
<li>Buy only what you need.</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT2"><span class="bold">Imperfect Foods</span> (imperfectfoods.com) and <span class="bold">Misfits Market</span> (misfitsmarket.com) have wonderful deals on produce and are an amazing way to cut down on waste and save money.</p>
<p class="H1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page243" title="243"/>Electromagnetic Radiation</p>
<p class="H2">Wi-Fi</p>
<p class="TXF1">As I’ve already said, your safest bet is never to use wireless. Switch to using Ethernet whenever possible. Ethernet is faster than Wi-Fi, anyway! The fastest Ethernet speeds hit 10 gigabytes per second (Gbps) or higher, whereas Wi-Fi tops out at 6.9 Gbps. <span class="bold">Tech Wellness</span> (techwellness.com) is a great source of plug-in options.</p>
<p class="TXT">If for some reason you cannot use Ethernet, find another way to minimize your exposure to router radiation.</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Turn your router off at night and when you’re not using it.</li>
<li>Stay as far away from your router as possible.</li>
</ul>
<p class="H3">Products for Reducing EMF Exposure</p>
<p class="SrcsH">EMF Meters</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Safe and Sound Pro II</span> (techwellness.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Erickhill EMF Meter</span> (available at amazon.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Latnex AF-5000 Multifield 5G EMF Meter</span> (available at emrss.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">TriField EMF Meter Model TF2</span> (emrss.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Remote Switches to Turn Off Routers</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Wi-Fi Switch Remote</span> (techwellness.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">EMF-Blocking Clothing</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Conscious Spaces</span> (consciousspaces.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Lambs:</span> Beanies, underwear, and hats that claim to block 99 percent of EMFs (getlambs.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page244" title="244"/>USB to Ethernet Converters</p>
<p class="TXF1">Get one of these so you can connect your various devices to the Ethernet.</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Insignia</span> (insigniaproducts.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Verrosa</span> (verrosa.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Router Shields</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Faraday Defense</span> (faradaydefense.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">EMF Essentials</span> (emfessentials.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Low-Radiation Routers</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">JRS Eco 100 D1 on Asus:</span> Emits radiation only when Wi-Fi is being used (jrseco.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Waveguard:</span> Minimizes EMF/5G/Wi-Fi radiation (waveguard.com/en)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Cell Phones</p>
<p class="SrcsH">Sources of EMF-Blocking Phone Accessories</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">SafeSleeve</span> (safesleevecases.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Waveguard</span> (to carry with you or for room) (waveguard.com/en)</li>
<li><span class="bold">SLNT</span> (slnt.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Source of Other Safe Electronic Accessories</p>
<ul class="bullet">
<li><span class="bold">GoDark Bags</span> (godarkbags.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Headphones</p>
<p class="TXF1">If you use headphones, ditch the Bluetooth earbuds and get wired.</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">EMF Protection Airtube Earphones</span> (techwellness.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page245" title="245"/>EMF Radiation-Free Earbuds Air Tube Stereo Headphones</span> (defendershield.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">EMF Radiation-Free Air Tube Kids Headphones</span> (defendershield.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">RF wireless headphones</span> (available at bestbuy.com and other stores)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Sennheiser RF headphones</span> (available at bestbuy.com and other stores)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Wired headphones</span> (available at walmart.com and other stores)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Airport Body Scanners</p>
<p class="TXF1">Instead of passing through the scanner, you have the legal right to opt out by allowing a TSA agent to pat you down. But allow some extra time for that to be done.</p>
<p class="H1">Clothing</p>
<p class="Type">Cotton and Denim</p>
<p class="TXF1">Shop secondhand. Not only is this a sustainable option, but used clothing generally contains fewer chemicals because it has been washed many times.</p>
<p class="SrcsH">Sources of Secondhand Clothing</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">ThredUp</span> (thredup.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">eBay</span> (ebay.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Mercari</span> (mercari.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Poshmark</span> (poshmark.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Depop</span> (depop.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Organic Fabric Clothing</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Candiani Denim</span> (candianidenim.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Pact</span> (wearpact.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Everlane</span> (everlane.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Lucy &amp; Yak</span> (lucyandyak.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page246" title="246"/>FatFace</span> (us.fatface.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Nudie Jeans</span> (nudiejeans.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Thought</span> (wearethought.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Toad&amp;Co</span> (toadandco.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Patagonia</span> (patagonia.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Quince</span> (onequince.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Known Supply</span> (knownsupply.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Tentree</span> (tentree.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Crann Organic</span> (crannorganic.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Sustainable, Healthy Cotton T-Shirts</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Certton</span> (certton.com.au)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Blessed Earth</span> (blessedearth.com.au)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Organic Embrace</span> (organicembrace.com.au)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Organic Basics</span> (us.organicbasics.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Brook There</span> (brookthere.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Thought</span> (wearethought.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Waterproof Clothing</p>
<p class="TXF1">Use a safe, nontoxic spray or wax to waterproof your clothing at home, for example:</p>
<ul class="bullet-top"><li><span class="bold">Nikwax PFA-Free Clothing Waterproof Wax</span> (rei.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">DetraPel PFA Waterproof Clothing Spray</span> (detrapel.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Nontoxic Waterproof Clothing and Gear</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Icebreaker</span> (icebreaker.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Nau</span> (nau.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">prAna</span> (prana.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Houdini Sportswear</span> (houdinisportswear.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Páramo</span> (paramo-clothing.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Didriksons</span> (didriksons.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page247" title="247"/>Picture Organic Clothing</span> (picture-organic-clothing.com/en)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Deuter</span> (deuter.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Royal Robbins</span> (royalrobbins.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">TheTentLab</span> (thetentlab.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Vegan Leather</p>
<p class="SrcsH">Vegan Leather Coats</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Bernardo Neo Active Double Up Hooded Puffer</span> (bernardofashions.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Noize Women’s GIGI Heavyweight Parka</span> (noize.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Save the Duck USA Women’s Colette Long Puffer Coat</span> (savetheduckusa.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Save the Duck USA Men’s Alter Hooded Parka</span> (savetheduckusa.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Harper Coats The Brunch Puffer</span> (harpercoats.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Matt &amp; Nat</span> (mattandnat.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Vegan Leather Handbags</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Pixie Mood:</span> This company has introduced cork into its products, started using expanded polyethylene (EPE) foam packaging, and uses recycled vegan leather. Its collections include tote bags, shoulder bags, cross-body bags, and bucket bags. (pixiemood.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Gunas USA:</span> Uses PETA-approved vegan leather (gunasthebrand.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Watson &amp; Wolfe:</span> This company specializes in vegan wallets and eco-friendly accessories. It also sells handbags. (watsonwolfe.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Melie Bianco:</span> 100 percent vegan and sweatshop-free bags (meliebianco.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Doshi:</span> Smart, fashionable, high-quality vegan bags, belts, wallets, backpacks, briefcases, and more. It uses recyclable, biodegradable, durable, and sustainable materials. (doshi.shop)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Vegan Shoe Brands</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page248" title="248"/>Aera</span> (aeranewyork.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Avesu Vegan Shoes</span> (avesuveganshoes.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Bhava</span> (bhavastudio.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Blue District</span> (shopbluedistrict.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Brave Gentleman</span> (bravegentleman.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Indosole</span> (indosole.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">MooShoes</span> (mooshoes.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Sylth Virago</span> (sylthvirago.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Taylor + Thomas</span> (taylorandthomasla.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Vivobarefoot</span> (vivobarefoot.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Vegan/Sustainable Clothing</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Amur:</span> Makes fashionable women’s wear from recycled materials, organic cotton, and cellulose (amur.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Ccilu:</span> Uses innovative technology to create eco-friendly shoes, recycling commonly discarded materials such as coffee grounds and plastic bottles (ccilu.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Brave Gentleman:</span> Uses materials such as recycled soda and water bottles, as well as recycled polyester/cotton blends diverted from waste streams (bravegentleman.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Reformation:</span> On-trend designs and high-quality fabrics, made partially from recycled vintage clothing (thereformation.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Loomstate:</span> Vegan-friendly brand that’s committed to using 100 percent certified organic cotton in its designs in order to keep the environment clean and farmers healthy (loomstate.org)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Parley for the Oceans:</span> Is trying to clean all the world’s seas of plastic debris and pollution. Part of the effort involves fashion collaborations with Adidas, fabric makers, even artists creating bags, sunglasses, and other products. (parley.tv)</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page249" title="249"/>Patagonia:</span> Has been recycling plastic bottles for use in its outerwear and other clothing since the 1990s. It takes plastic from the ocean and recycles that, too. (patagonia.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Wuxly:</span> Local production that limits its carbon footprint. It is committed to reducing CO<sub>2</sub> emissions and further supports efforts to protect wildlife. (wuxly.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Underwear</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Wolf x Rose:</span> My favorite! Healthy, clean, organic cotton garments by my good buddy and designer Jeff Garner. (wolfxrose.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">WAMA Underwear:</span> The company estimates that it’s saved 283,277 days’ worth of drinking water and 297,560 hours’ worth of LED bulb energy. (wamaunderwear.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Knickey:</span> Certified as climate neutral, it uses responsibly produced organic cotton, ensures fair labor standards from manufacturers, and has an underwear recycling program. Also, it releases a detailed impact report that covers sustainability improvements each year. (knickey.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">TomboyX:</span> Sizes that range from 3XS to 6X and nongendered styles. TomboyX is B Corp certified, meaning that it meets B Lab’s rigorous standards for social and environmental impact as well as continued accountability and transparency about its practices. Though it does not use organic cotton, the fabric has been tested for harmful materials. (tomboyx.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Arq:</span> Products come from a family-owned sewing factory that uses sustainably dyed fabrics. (shoparq.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Oddobody:</span> Materials are completely compostable. Furthermore, the company uses a family-run manufacturer in Peru and regularly visits the factories and farms that create the underwear. (oddobody.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page250" title="250"/>Organic Cotton Underwear Brands</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Pact:</span> Cotton basics for every gender and size (wearpact.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Boody:</span> Collections made from sustainably grown bamboo viscose (boody.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Brook There:</span> Sustainable lingerie made from organic cotton and natural silk (brookthere.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Proclaim:</span> Wide range of products made from Tencel or Repreve, a polyester fiber made from recycled plastic water bottles (wearproclaim.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Huha:</span> Produced with a natural antibacterial that looks to keep your “huha” healthy. The company uses Tencel as its main material and ships plastic free. (hu-ha.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Cosabella:</span> Luxury lingerie made in Italy since 1983. Handmade in family-run workshops. (cosabella.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Cuup:</span> Bra sizes ranging from A to H, sustainable materials and ethical practices (shopcuup.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Girlfriend Collective:</span> Bras and undies made with recycled plastic from water bottles. They can be recycled again through its ReGirlfriend initiative when you no longer need it. (girlfriend.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Organic Basics:</span> Bra sizes from 30A to 38C and XS to XL. The enterprise focuses on sustainable materials such as regenerative organic cotton and Tencel and ethical production. (organicbasics.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Tentree:</span> Made with Tencel, organic cotton, and Refibra lyocell, in which upcycled cotton scraps are turned into cotton pulp and then combined with wood pulp. Even the elastic trims are made using recycled materials. Plus, it is certified B Corp, and for every purchase, the company plants ten trees. (tentree.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Tights</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Swedish Stockings:</span> Sustainable hosiery with a vast range of colors and styles of recycled tights. (swedishstockings.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page251" title="251"/>Kintra:</span> An emerging company that is eliminating petroleum in the development of textiles. Derived from sugar monomers that decompose after use. (kintrafibers.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Dear Denier:</span> Tights made from recycled polyamide and elastane with low-waste production practices. Plus, the company has a water recycling management system and offers a recycling program that accepts tights from any brand. (deardenier.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Fabric Dyes</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Earth Pigments</span> (earthpigments.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Organic Cotton Plus</span> (organiccottonplus.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">NatureColorsEU</span> (available at etsy.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Jacquard</span> (available at amazon.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Cutch Natural Dye</span> (available at etsy.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="DiyT">DIY Organic Tie-Dye Process</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>White cotton fabric for dyeing</li>
<li>Rubber bands</li>
<li>Gloves</li>
<li>Vinegar or salt (as a fixative)</li>
<li>Water</li>
<li>Various pots and pans</li>
<li>Containers for dyeing</li>
<li>Small strainer</li>
<li>Raw materials to make dyes; for example, turmeric powder for yellow; red onion skins for pink; red cabbage leaves for purple</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step2"><span class="bold">Prepare the fabric for dyeing.</span> Use the rubber bands to create a pattern on the fabric. Once you’re satisfied with your design, it’s time to treat your fabric with a fixative. If you are making a berry-based dye, mix <span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> cup of salt with 8 cups of water and bring to a boil. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page252" title="252"/>Simmer your fabric in the solution for one hour prior to dyeing. If you are making a plant/veggie-based dye, mix 1 part vinegar to 4 parts water and follow the same process. When done simmering, run the fabric under cool water and wring out a bit of the excess water.</p>
<p class="Step"><span class="bold">Make the dye.</span> Wearing gloves, cut or tear the raw ingredients into small pieces and measure. Place into a pot and pour in water (2 parts water to 1 part raw ingredients; for example, 1 cup of torn cabbage leaves to 2 cups of water). If you are using a spice such as turmeric, the proportions will be 1–2 tablespoons of spice to 3–4 cups of water. Bring the mixture to a boil and simmer for about an hour. The longer you cook it, the more intense your color will become. When done simmering, strain dye into a container or jar big enough to fit your garment or fabric. You will feel a bit like a mad scientist at this point, but just go with it!</p>
<p class="Step"><span class="bold">Dye the fabric.</span> Wearing gloves, place the fabric into the dye containers and allow it to rest for a while. We didn’t play around with using multiple colors on a single garment, but you could experiment with placing dye in a bottle with an applicator and squirting it directly onto the fabric, as many people do when tie-dyeing. Once the fabric has reached the desired hue (the color will lighten a little as your fabric dries), remove it from the dye and rinse with cool water until the water runs clear. Remove the rubber bands and hang the clothing to dry.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Grove Collaborative (grove.com)</span></p>
<p class="Type">OEKO-TEX Certification</p>
<p class="TXF1">OEKO-TEX has several labels that identify whether textiles from towels to clothing have been tested for harmful substances. Its Standard 100 label uses the European Chemical Agency’s list of substances of very high concern and other regulations to determine if any harmful substances were used in manufacturing, while the Made in Green label also ensures sustainable manufacturing. You can also enter a product’s OEKO-TEX label number into OEKO-TEX’s Label Check and trace the product back to its production facility. (oeko-tex.com/en/label-check)</p>
<p class="H1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page253" title="253"/>Household Products</p>
<p class="Type">Cookware</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Anodized aluminum</span> is treated with an acidic solution that changes how the metal behaves. It is easier to clean and can have nonstick qualities. Plus, it supposedly doesn’t cause leaching of aluminum into your food to the extent that regular aluminum does.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Stainless steel</span> is an alloy that typically contains iron, chrome, and nickel. Resistant to rust and corrosion, it distributes heat evenly over its surface. As long as you grease or oil the pan before cooking and soak it in water right afterward, it’s easy to clean. There’s little reason to believe that cooking with stainless steel is harmful, but it may aggravate a sensitivity or allergy to nickel.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Ceramic cookware</span> is most likely safe, but not enough research has been done to be sure. Always read the label, as some brands may include Teflon.</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Safe Cookware</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Rad USA:</span> Anodized aluminum, nonstick cookware by my good buddy, chef Oren Zroya (radusa.co)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Caraway:</span> Teflon, PFAS, and heavy metal free (carawayhome.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">360 Cookware:</span> Nontoxic stainless-steel cookware options (360cookware.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Milo Cookware:</span> This brand focuses on longevity, sustainability, and conscious production. Its cookware is crafted from 40 percent nonstick recycled cast iron sprayed with TOMATEC enamel. (available at kanalifestyle.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Made In:</span> Artisan-made, nonstick, nontoxic stainless-steel cookware (oven safe up to 800°F) and carbon-steel cookware (oven safe up to 1,200°F) (madeincookware.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Smithey Ironware:</span> Heirloom-quality hand-forged carbon-steel and cast-iron cookware (smithey.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page254" title="254"/>Great Jones:</span> Stainless-steel pots and pans, ceramic nonstick cookware sets, and cast-iron skillets that are oven safe and display worthy. Free from PFOA and PTFE chemicals. (greatjonesgoods.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Safety Tips</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Unless you’re using glass or stone bakeware, don’t store food in the pot or pan it was cooked in.</li>
<li>Avoid cleaning cookware with rough materials or metal mesh, which can scratch and compromise surfaces.</li>
<li>Minimize the amount of time your food is in contact with metals from pots and pans.</li>
<li>Use as little olive oil, coconut oil, or cooking spray as possible to minimize the amount of cookware coating that sticks to your food.</li>
<li>Clean pots and pans thoroughly after each use.</li>
<li>Replace cookware every two to three years or as soon as you notice any gouges or scratches in the coating.</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Aluminum Foil</p>
<p class="TXF1"><span class="bold">Avoid aluminum altogether!</span> That should be easy to remember. Exposure can result in respiratory and neurological problems. It has even been linked to Alzheimer’s disease. Also, it is not environmentally friendly. However, if you feel you must use it, anodized aluminum is the safest option.</p>
<p class="SrcsH">Anodized Aluminum Brands</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Ninja Foodi NeverStick:</span> PTFE nonstick coat that’s PFOA free (ninjakitchen.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">T-fal Ultimate:</span> Nonstick and PFOA free (available in stores such as Kohl’s and Bed Bath &amp; Beyond)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Calphalon:</span> Three layers of PFOA-free nonstick coating (available at amazon.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page255" title="255"/>Cuisinart Chef’s Classic:</span> Has a hard anodized coating that is PFOA-free, scratch resistant, and durable (cuisinart.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Rachael Ray:</span> Has a PTFE nonstick coat that’s PFOA free (available at wayfair.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Cook N Home:</span> Is PFOA free (available at wayfair.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Safe Food Wraps</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Earth Hero reusable food wraps</span> (earthhero.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Cedar food wraps</span> (available at amazon.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">LilyBee wraps</span> (lilybeewrap.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Silicon reusable sandwich wraps</span> (available at amazon.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Nordic by Nature reusable sandwich bags</span> (nordicbynaturebags.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Khala &amp; Co. Reusable Vegan Food Wraps</span> (available at earthhero.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Responsible Products Certified Compostable Food Bags</span> (responsibleproducts.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Plastic Food Containers</p>
<p class="TXF1"><span class="bold">Don’t use them!</span> Glass, ceramic, metal, wood, and bamboo are all safe alternatives. If you must use plastic:</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Never microwave food in anything other than ceramic or glass.</li>
<li>Don’t put them into the dishwasher; don’t allow plastic to get that hot.</li>
<li>Check the recycling code on the bottom of containers, and avoid plastics with recycling codes 3, 6, and 7, which may contain phthalates, styrene, and bisphenols, unless they are labeled “biobased” or “greenware,” indicating that they’re made from corn.</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page256" title="256"/>Safe Storage Containers</p>
<p class="SrcsH">Stainless Steel</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Thrive Market</span> (thrivemarket.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Package Free</span> (packagefreeshop.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Thanos</span> (available at wayfair.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Bentgo</span> (bentgo.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Rebrilliant food storage containers</span> (available at wayfair.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Life Without Plastic</span> (lifewithoutplastic.com)</li>
</ul>

<p class="SrcsH">Glass</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Crate &amp; Barrel</span> (crateandbarrel.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Package Free</span> (packagefreeshop.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Ikea</span> (ikea.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">DE plastic-free glass food storage containers</span> (available at amazon.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Ceramic</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">CorningWare French White 24-Inch Baking Dish with Lid</span> (corningware.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Marie Kondo Cloud White Modular Ceramic Canisters</span> (available at containerstore.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Cloth Bags (for Dry Foods)</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Veggie Saver</span> (veggiesaver.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT2">Another way to go plastic free is to buy products from <span class="bold">Shopetee</span> (shopetee.com), an online store for containers as well as toothbrushes and more.</p>
<p class="H2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page257" title="257"/>Sheets, Bedding, and Pillows</p>
<p class="SrcsH">Sources</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Parachute Home:</span> Climate Neutral certified, Global Organic Textile Standard (GOTS) certified, and OEKO-TEX certified. Timeless and durable essentials with various organic options. (parachutehome.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Ettitude:</span> Uses CleanBamboo, which is sourced from FSC-certified sustainable forests and made in a nontoxic, closed-loop system that recycles 98 percent of water (ettitude.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">HauteCoton:</span> From seed to consumer. All products are thoughtfully crafted and responsibly sourced at every stage of production. (hautecoton.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Eucalypso Home:</span> Sheets with 100 percent Tencel lyocell from natural eucalyptus fibers, which are cultivated using one-tenth the amount of water used to cultivate cotton and are milled in a zero-footprint, OEKO-TEX-certified environment in Austria. (eucalypsohome.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Coyuchi:</span> Uses a high proportion of eco-friendly materials, including GOTS cotton (coyuchi.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Buffy:</span> Known for sustainably manufacturing products using fibers made from eucalyptus, hemp, and recycled plastic (buffy.co)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Organic Bedding</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">The Beach People:</span> Infuses eucalyptus fiber, a hypoallergenic, breathable, long-lasting material, into its fabric blends to create a silk-like material (thebeachpeople.co)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Mulberry Threads:</span> Makes organic bamboo bedsheets (mulberrythreads.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Made Trade:</span> Stocks organic sheets, sustainable robes, and ethically made towels from brands such as Area Home and Hoot’s (madetrade.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page258" title="258"/>West Elm:</span> Stocks products made from linen, organic cotton, and a variety of other luxurious fabrics (westelm.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Bhumi Organic Cotton:</span> Uses organic cotton to completely eliminate the harmful effects of conventional cotton on farmers, their families, and surrounding villages (bhumiorganic.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Under the Canopy:</span> Bedding, bath, and apparel (underthecanopy.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Furniture and Upholstery</p>
<p class="SrcsH">Sources of Nontoxic Products</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Savvy Rest:</span> Made from organic fabrics such as cotton, hemp, and wool; natural Talalay latex foam; solid wood; and more. The company has various third-party certifications for sustainability and safety, including GOTS, Cradle to Cradle, and GREENGUARD. Free from PFAS, flame retardants, formaldehyde glue, cardboard, metal coils, particleboard, plywood, and veneer. (savvyrest.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Burrow:</span> Nontoxic, free from PFASs and flame retardants. CertiPUR-US certified. (burrow.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Carolina Morning:</span> Beds made from locally harvested Appalachian poplar wood and finished with a nontoxic finish and cushions made with 100 percent certified organic cotton canvas, then filled with natural and eco-friendly kapok fiber. (zafu.net)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Medley:</span> Uses FSC-certified solid wood for its frames with zero-VOC glues. In its foam cushions you can choose between CertiPUR-US-certified foam and certified organic natural Dunlop latex. All free from flame retardants. (medleyhome.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Sabai:</span> Free from formaldehyde, flame retardants, and PFASs. Their cushions are made from CertiPUR-US foam, their fabrics are untreated, and the wood used for the frames is FSC certified and finished with a low-VOC stain. (sabai.design)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Natural Home:</span> Fabric options include organic cotton, linen, and wool. Free from PFASs. (thefutonshop.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page259" title="259"/>Ecobalanza:</span> Uses nontoxic zero-VOC glues and Rubio Monocoat stains (ecobalanza.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Pure Upholstery:</span> Organic latex with a feather and down wrap, solid maple wood, organic wool, GOTS-certified organic cotton, PFAS free, GREENGUARD-certified water-based glue, and Rubio Monocoat wood finish on legs. No flame retardants. (pureupholstery.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Cisco Home:</span> Inside Green option contains organic natural latex wrapped in either eco-wool or feathers and down. The company uses certified solid woods, organic cotton fabrics with no toxic treatments, jute and hemp instead of springs, and WOCA natural stains. Free from flame retardants. (ciscohome.net)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Carpeting</p>
<p class="SrcsH">In General</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Choose solid wood flooring with a low-VOC finish.</li>
<li>Choose tile with a low-VOC sealant.</li>
<li>Choose cork or natural linoleum when possible.</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">What to Look For in a Carpet</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li>Nontreated fibers</li>
<li>Zero VOC (ideal)</li>
<li>Made of wool or cotton</li>
<li>Padding made from wool or felt</li>
<li>Green Label Plus or GREENGUARD low-VOC certification</li>
<li>No stain or waterproofing treatments</li>
<li>Low-VOC adhesives or fastener system</li>
<li>Handmade</li>
<li>Ethically and sustainably produced</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page260" title="260"/>Sources of Good-Quality Rugs</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Revival:</span> Organic cotton, wool, hemp, and other healthy materials (revivalrugs.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Nestig:</span> Organic cotton and nontoxic dyes (nestig.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">The Citizenry:</span> Ethically and sustainably made; nontoxic (the-citizenry.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Lorena Canals:</span> Handmade by artists in northern India, using only recycled and natural fibers (such as cotton and wool) and nontoxic dyes. They are machine washable. (lorenacanals.us)</li>
<li><span class="bold">West Elm:</span> Nontoxic; made from jute, hemp, seagrass, and other healthy materials (westelm.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Ruggable:</span> Machine washable; water-based dyes; no harsh chemicals. The company donates part of its proceeds to One Tree Planted, Best Friends Animal Society, and Baby2Baby. (ruggable.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Air-Conditioning</p>
<p class="SrcsH">Sources of Air Conditioners</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Evapolar:</span> Eco friendly, using no freonlike liquids. Energy and cost efficient, too. (evapolar.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">EcoCooling:</span> Natural, cost efficient, and environmentally friendly. (ecocooling.co.uk)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Hessaire:</span> Cost efficient and eco friendly. (hessaire.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Sources of Whole-House Fans</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">QuietCool</span> (quietcoolsystems.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Whole House Fan</span> (wholehousefan.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Cool Attic</span> (available at amazon.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page261" title="261"/>Sources of Ductless Mini-split Air Conditioners</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Senville</span> (senville.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Cooper &amp; Hunter</span> (available on cooperandhunter.us)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Pioneer</span> (pioneerminisplit.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Air Fresheners</p>
<p class="DiyT">DIY Air Freshener No. 1</p>
<p class="TXF1">Fill a glass spray bottle halfway with witch hazel. Fill rest of the bottle with distilled water. Add 25–30 drops of essential oils (not fragrance oils). Add dried flowers (optional). Shake and spray.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Martha Stewart (marthastewart.com)</span></p>
<p class="DiyT2">DIY Air Freshener No. 2</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>10 drops lavender essential oil</li>
<li>10 drops vanilla essential oil</li>
<li>1 tablespoon witch hazel</li>
<li>Any other essential oil of your choice</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Combine all ingredients in a glass spray bottle.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Joy Food Sunshine (diynatural.com)</span></p>
<p class="Type">Air Purifiers</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Therapure</span> (envion.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Coway Airmega Mighty</span> (available at amazon.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Coway Airmega 200M</span> (available at walmart.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Levoit Core 300</span> (available at homedepot.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Medify Air MA-14</span> (available at amazon.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page262" title="262"/>Essential Oil Diffusers</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Grove Co. Essential Oil Burner</span> (grove.co)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Aroma Om Deluxe Diffuser</span> (available at saje.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">TerraFuse Deluxe Diffuser</span> (available at planttherapy.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Microwave Ovens</p>
<p class="TXF1">If you are at home, use a regular stove or oven instead of a microwave. Even if it might take longer, it is better for you. Cooking can even have positive benefits to your mental health. If your home oven has a broiler option, this is another way to reheat your food and add a crispy texture.</p>
<p class="H2">Instant Pots and Pressure Cookers</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Ninja</span> (ninjakitchen.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Instant Pot</span> (instantpot.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">T-fal USA</span> (t-falusa.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Breville</span> (breville.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Toaster Ovens</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Hamilton Beach</span> (hamiltonbeach.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">KitchenAid</span> (kitchenaid.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">Portable Food Warmers and Crockpots</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Crockpot</span> (crock-pot.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Aotto</span> (aotto.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Travelisimo</span> (travelisimobrand.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page263" title="263"/>Laundry Detergent</p>
<p class="DiyT2">DIY Laundry Detergent No. 1</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>1 5-ounce bar pure Castile soap</li>
<li>1 cup washing soda</li>
<li>1 cup baking soda</li>
<li>1 cup coarse salt</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Place the Castile soap in the bowl of a food processor and blitz it until it’s finely ground. If you don’t have a food processor, finely chop the soap or use a cheese grater instead. The finer you can get it, the better.</p>
<p class="Step">Then, add your washing soda, baking soda, and salt. Blend until you have a fine powder.</p>
<p class="Step">Once it’s well blended, store in a labeled glass jar with an airtight lid.</p>
<p class="Step">Use 2 tablespoons per load of laundry if you have a standard machine, and 1 tablespoon per load if you have a high-efficiency machine.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> MindBodyGreen (mindbodygreen.com)</span></p>
<p class="DiyT2">DIY Laundry Detergent No. 2</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> cup Epsom salts</li>
<li>1<span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> cups baking soda</li>
<li>1<span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> cups washing soda</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup sea salt</li>
<li>20–25 drops essential oils of your choice</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Mix all ingredients well, making sure to incorporate essential oils, if using, and blend in any clumps.</p>
<p class="Step">Store in glass jar of choice with a lid.</p>
<p class="Step"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page264" title="264"/>Use 1 heaping tablespoon per load (2 for extra soiled or extremely large loads).</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Fresh Mommy Blog (freshmommyblog.com)</span></p>
<p class="SrcsH2">Laundry Detergent Sheets</p>
<p class="TXF1">Most laundry detergent sheets are cost effective, great for the environment, and free from harsh chemicals and fragrances. Always make sure to get the unscented versions.</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Tru Earth Eco-Strips Laundry Detergent</span> (tru.earth)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Earth Breeze Eco Sheets</span> (earthbreeze.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Sheets Laundry Club Laundry Detergent Sheets</span> (sheetslaundryclub.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">EcoRoots Laundry Detergent Sheets</span> (ecoroots.us)</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Laundry Detergents</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Branch Basics The Concentrate</span> (branchbasics.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Nature First Soap Berry Laundry Detergent Pods</span> (putnaturefirst.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Simply Co. Laundry Detergent</span> (available at packagefreeshop.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Sea Salt Zum Laundry Soap</span> (indigowild.com)</li>
</ul>
<p class="H2">All-Purpose Cleaning Products</p>
<p class="TXF1">For the following recipes, use distilled water, as tap water can cause streaking.</p>
<p class="DiyT">DIY Glass Cleaner No. 1</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>2 cups distilled water</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> cup white or apple cider vinegar</li>
<li><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page265" title="265"/><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> cup rubbing alcohol 70 percent concentration</li>
<li>1−2 drops orange essential oil for scent (optional)</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Combine the ingredients in a spray bottle.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Good Housekeeping (goodhouskeeping.com)</span></p>
<p class="DiyT2">DIY Glass Cleaner No. 2</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>One part white vinegar</li>
<li>One part distilled water</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Combine the ingredients in a spray bottle. If you don’t like the smell of vinegar (which dissipates quickly), you can add about 10 drops of your favorite essential oil and shake to mix.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> The Spruce (thespruce.com)</span></p>
<p class="DiyT2">DIY All-Purpose Cleaner</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>One part white vinegar</li>
<li>One part water</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">4</span> teaspoon grated lemon rind</li>
<li>Rosemary sprigs</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Combine the ingredients in a spray bottle. Let infuse for one week before using.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> The Spruce (thespruce.com)</span></p>
<p class="DiyT2">DIY Disinfectant Spray</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li>2 cups distilled water</li>
<li>1 tablespoon white vinegar</li>
<li>A few drops of tea tree oil</li>
</ul>
<p class="Step">Combine the ingredients in a spray bottle. If you like, add a couple drops of lavender or other essential oil for scent.</p>
<p class="DiyT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page266" title="266"/>DIY Natural Heavy-Duty Scrub</p>
<ul class="ultxt"><li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> lemon</li>
<li><span class="fraction_numerator">1</span><span class="fraction_slash">/</span><span class="fraction_denominator">2</span> cup borax powder</li>
</ul>
<p class="TXT">To remove rust stains on porcelain or enamel sinks and tubs, dip the cut side of the lemon into the borax and scrub the sink or tub’s surface, then rinse. This is <span class="ital">not</span> safe for marble or granite. You can find borax, a laundry booster, in the supermarket detergent aisle or order it on Amazon.</p>
<p class="Src"><span class="bold">Source:</span><span class="ital"> Good Housekeeping (goodhouskeeping.com)</span></p>
<p class="H3F">Certifications and More Information</p>
<p class="TXF1">For more information on safe cleaning products, consult the following.</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">EPA Safer Choice:</span> Products with an EPA Safer Choice label not only contain ingredients that have been thoroughly researched and approved by the EPA but have also been tested for performance and sustainable packaging.</li>
<li><span class="bold">Environmental Working Group Guide to Healthy Cleaning:</span> A database for cleaning products. Because these products aren’t required to disclose all ingredients, EWG researches “beyond the labels” to ensure that they are safe to use. (ewg.org/guides/cleaners)</li>
<li><span class="bold">EWG Verified:</span> If you prefer not to have to sift through the Healthy Cleaning database, an easy shortcut is to look for products that have the label EWG Verified. This label means that the product meets EWG’s “strict, scientific standards for transparency and health,” meaning that it doesn’t contain any ingredients with health, ecotoxicity, or contamination concerns and that the manufacturer is transparent about all ingredients on its labels, including fragrance, and follows good manufacturing practices. Look for the EWG Verified seal on product labels.</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page267" title="267"/>ECOLOGO:</span> UL Solutions certifies cleaning products with its ECOLOGO label that have a lower environmental impact in the manufacturing process. You can shop for these products on Amazon by searching for ECOLOGO.</li>
<li><span class="bold">MADE SAFE:</span> The nonprofit Nontoxic Certified created the MADE SAFE seal to verify that household cleaning products are created with nontoxic ingredients and don’t contain any of the 6,500 substances on its banned list. It also looks for products that are not going to persist and pollute our water, air, or soil. You can find products on its database, look for the MADE SAFE seal on their labels, or search for them on Amazon.</li>
</ul>
<p class="SrcsH2">Suppliers of Safe Cleaning Products</p>
<ul class="bullet"><li><span class="bold">Seventh Generation</span> (seventhgeneration.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Guests on Earth</span> (guestsonearth.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Dr. Bronner’s:</span> Its biodegradable cleaner is not organic but has an A rating from the EWG (drbronner.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Grove Collaborative</span> (grove.co)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Tru Earth</span> (tru.earth)</li>
<li><span class="bold">The Honest Company</span> (honest.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Koala Eco</span> (koalaeco.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Greenshield Organic</span> (greenshieldorganic.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Common Good</span> (commongoodandco.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold">Better Life Unscented Glass Cleaner</span> (available at hivebrands.com)</li>
<li><span class="bold"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page268" title="268"/>Meliora Cleaning Products</span> (meliorameansbetter.com)</li>
</ul>
</body>
</html>