<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Fatal Conveniences</title>
  <link href="../Styles/FatalConveniences.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1096cf69-c1c2-4b94-ac1d-5d952fe64055" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="frontmatter">
<p class="FMBMH"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pageiv" title="iv"/>Contents</p>
<p class="TF" id="toc-COV"><a href="Cover.xhtml"><span class="blue">Cover</span></a></p>
<p class="TFMBMH" id="toc-TTL"><a href="Titlepage.xhtml"><span class="blue">Title Page</span></a></p>
<p class="TFMBMH" id="toc-DED"><a href="Dedication.xhtml"><span class="blue">Dedication</span></a></p>

<p class="TCNCT" id="toc-INT"><a href="Introduction.xhtml"><span class="blue">Introduction</span></a></p>
<p class="TCDes">A few words to get us started down the road to wisdom about the conveniences we love that don’t always love us back.</p>

<p class="TCNCT" id="toc-CH001"><a href="CH001.xhtml"><span class="blue">1: What Is a Fatal Convenience?</span></a></p>
<p class="TCDes">Here’s where I explain what I’m going to be talking about. If you were in a movie, this would be the scene where you’d suddenly realize with a shock that you were in terrible, life-or-death danger. A happy ending is still possible—depending on what you do next.</p>

<p class="TCNCT" id="toc-CH002"><a href="CH002.xhtml"><span class="blue">2: This Is the Chapter About My Dad</span></a></p>
<p class="TCDes">The subject of this book should be important to anyone who cares about his or her life, although I also had an extremely personal reason for wanting to write it.</p>

<p class="TCNCT" id="toc-CH003"><a href="CH003.xhtml"><span class="blue">3: Our Chemical Romance</span></a></p>
<p class="TCDes">An entire chapter about chemicals? Sounds like homework, I know, but I tried my best to keep it simple, short, and to the point. So don’t worry. If it weren’t so important to your future, believe me, I wouldn’t be asking you to read it.</p>

<p class="TCNCT" id="toc-CH004"><a href="CH004.xhtml"><span class="blue">4: Personal Care Products</span></a></p>
<p class="TCDes">For products that claim to benefit our skin, teeth, hair, and other important body parts, they pack in an awful lot of toxic, harmful substances. But they wear a halo of wholesomeness. Plus, they smell so good.</p>

<p class="TCNCT" id="toc-CH005"><a href="CH005.xhtml"><span class="blue"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pagev" title="v"/>5: Food and Beverages</span></a></p>
<p class="TCDes">When you realize that many of the things we consume in order to stay alive contain harmful substances that can make us ill, it’s a little depressing. But the truth is that the easier something is to eat and drink, the worse it is for our health.</p>

<p class="TCNCT" id="toc-CH006"><a href="CH006.xhtml"><span class="blue">6: Electromagnetic Radiation</span></a></p>
<p class="TCDes">You can’t see it, hear it, or smell it, and it emanates from the coolest things we own: our electronic tools and toys. By now, they all feel more like necessities than conveniences. No wonder we’d rather not think about the invisible hazards of the tech we love.</p>

<p class="TCNCT" id="toc-CH007"><a href="CH007.xhtml"><span class="blue">7: Clothing</span></a></p>
<p class="TCDes">With all the obvious dangers that surround us, we might never suspect that our clothes might also be hurting us. Well, guess again! Even our apparel contains quite a few conveniences, and some of those are not doing us any favors.</p>

<p class="TCNCT" id="toc-CH008"><a href="CH008.xhtml"><span class="blue">8: Household Products</span></a></p>
<p class="TCDes">We love our homes and do our best to make them friendly, welcoming, and clean. So how can it be that the safest, most comfortable place in the world is filled with so many hazardous, toxic, and sketchy bad influences?</p>

<p class="TCNCT" id="toc-CH009"><a href="CH009.xhtml"><span class="blue">9: Some Final Thoughts</span></a></p>
<p class="TCDes">Just a few parting words before I let you go.</p>

<p class="TCNCT" id="toc-CH010"><a href="CH010.xhtml"><span class="blue">10: Okay, So <span class="boldital">Now</span> What Should We Do?</span></a></p>
<p class="TCDes">Believe it or not, there’s good news amid all these Fatal Conveniences: Today, there are many nonfatal alternatives that make life easy and enjoyable without making us sick and killing us or the planet. Here I provide a ton of good sources and even some DIY solutions.</p>

<p class="TFMBMHF" id="toc-ACK"><a href="Acknowledgments.xhtml"><span class="blue">Acknowledgments</span></a></p>
<p class="TCDes">It takes a village to write a book, especially this one. Here’s where I give many, many thanks.</p>

<p class="TFMBMH" id="toc-ANS"><a href="ANoteOnSources.xhtml"><span class="blue"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pagevi" title="vi"/>A Note on Sources</span></a></p>
<p class="TCDes">Where to find the scientific research, studies, papers, and articles we used in preparing this monster. Remember that scientists change their minds all the time, but I did my best to be accurate.</p>

<p class="TFMBMH" id="toc-IND"><a href="Index.xhtml"><span class="blue">Index</span></a></p>

<p class="TFMBMH" id="toc-ATA"><a href="AboutTheAuthor.xhtml"><span class="blue">About the Author</span></a></p>
<p class="TFMBMH" id="toc-ALS"><a href="Alsoby.xhtml"><span class="blue">Also by Darin Olien</span></a></p>
<p class="TFMBMH" id="toc-CPY"><a href="Copyright.xhtml"><span class="blue">Copyright</span></a></p>
<p class="TFMBMH" id="toc-ATP"><a href="AboutThePublisher.xhtml"><span class="blue"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="pagevii" title="vii"/>About the Publisher</span></a></p>
</body>
</html>