<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Fatal Conveniences</title>
  <link href="../Styles/FatalConveniences.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1096cf69-c1c2-4b94-ac1d-5d952fe64055" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="backmatter">
<p class="FMBMH"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-CPY"><span class="blue"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page294" title="294"/>Copyright</span></a></p>

<p class="CRF">This book contains advice and information relating to health care. It should be used to supplement rather than replace the advice of your doctor or another trained health professional. If you know or suspect you have a health problem, it is recommended that you seek your physician’s advice before embarking on any medical program or treatment. All efforts have been made to assure the accuracy of the information contained in this book as of the date of publication. This publisher and the author disclaim liability for any medical outcomes that may occur as a result of applying the methods suggested in this book.</p>

  <p class="CRF"><span class="sc">FATAL CONVENIENCES</span>. Copyright © 2023 by Darin Olien. All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereafter invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.</p>

  <p class="CRF"><span class="sc">FIRST EDITION</span></p>

<p class="CRF"><span class="ital">Cover design by Milan Bozic</span></p>
<p class="CR"><span class="ital">Cover art by Justin Metz</span></p>

  <p class="CRF">Digital Edition MAY 2023 ISBN: 978-0-06-311455-5</p>
  <p class="CR">Version 04042023</p>
  <p class="CR">Print ISBN: 978-0-06-311453-1</p>

</body>
</html>