<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
  <title>Fatal Conveniences</title>
  <link href="../Styles/FatalConveniences.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:1096cf69-c1c2-4b94-ac1d-5d952fe64055" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter">
<p class="FMBMH"><a href="Contents.xhtml#toc-INT"><span class="blue"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page1" title="1"/>Introduction</span></a></p>
<p class="TXF"><span class="boldsc">I LOVE CONVENIENCES.</span></p>
<p class="TXT">We all do! And for good reason—they make our lives so much better. Easier. Without conveniences, life would be really hard. It would suck.</p>
<p class="TXT">Here’s an example of a pretty amazing convenience we all enjoy: the wheel! Try to picture what life would be like if someone hadn’t come up with the wheel way back whenever. Hard to imagine. But definitely a drag.</p>
<p class="TXT">Here’s another great one: fire! Think of all the awesome things that happened once we managed to create and control fire and heat. We wouldn’t recognize our lives without it. It goes way beyond just making things easier.</p>
<p class="TXT">I could spend all day naming wonderful conveniences: The internal combustion engine. Electrical power. Indoor plumbing. Flight. Agriculture. Wi-Fi. True, we could live without them. But life wouldn’t be as much fun.</p>
<p class="TXT">This book is a convenience. Somebody—a team of us, actually—had to research a long list of subjects and then organize the information and explain what it means and package it in a form that you could understand and easily use. What if everybody interested in this subject had to spend days and weeks wading through scientific literature, trying to make sense of it, and then come up with advice on the best way to live? Not many people would do all that on their own.</p>
<p class="TXT">But we don’t have to—thanks to our gift for conveniences.</p>
<p class="TXT"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page2" title="2"/>I was about to say it’s human nature to find ways of making life easier and more efficient. But the truth is that <span class="ital">all</span> animals love conveniences. I just read about some cockatoos in Australia that figured out how to open garbage cans so they could eat what was inside. Some birds taught themselves the skill, while others watched until they learned to do it, too. Still other cockatoos just waited until everybody else finished eating, at which point they fed on the leftovers—a lot less work than scrounging for dinner old school.</p>
<p class="TXT">I live with two German shepherds, a six-year-old named Chaga and a four-year-old named Ella. They wouldn’t even exist if ten thousand or so years ago some wolves hadn’t discovered that if they hung around humans, they could eat their food scraps, which was a hell of a lot easier than chasing down prey and killing it.</p>
<p class="TXT">So it’s obvious that all living creatures love conveniences and are excellent at inventing them. It’s like a force of nature. It’s who we are. It’s a great thing.</p>
<p class="TXT">Until, of course . . .</p>
<p class="TXT">Until we go too far, and the conveniences we create start making us sick and killing us. Then they’re not so great. They’re not so great once they start causing cancers and other terrible diseases or when they disrupt our ability to make babies or when they trash our environment and hurt every living thing and the planet itself. Then conveniences aren’t so cool.</p>
<p class="TXT">That’s what I’m going to talk about in this book—the Fatal Conveniences that claim to help us but instead do us harm—even cause death, believe it or not.</p>
<p class="TXT">But don’t worry, my mission is <span class="ital">not</span> to make your life more inconvenient or to scare you away from using the conveniences you love. It’s to expose the ones that are damaging us, and show that it’s possible to find terrific products that are <span class="ital">not</span> fatal and are <span class="ital">not</span> harmful to ourselves and our world. That’s our goal. And I have some amazing, wonderful things to show you along the way.</p>
<p class="TXT">Let’s get going!</p>
</body>
</html>